WRITING IN THE DARK

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I want to thank Jennifer Barnes and john Edward Lawson for having faith in this book. They're very special people. I also want to thank my fabulous agent Cherry Weiner for her guidance and friendship.

DEDICATION

This one’s for Lawrence Block, whose columns and books on writing fiction taught me more than any class ever could.

PREFACE

ENTER FREELY AND OF YOUR OWN WILL.

PART ONE.

Why I Write Horror.

“So, why do you write horror?”
It's a question I've thought about a lot over the years, and it might surprise you to learn that I don't have a definite answer—or at least not a single answer. I can, however, pinpoint specific moments in my life that led me to my love affair with all things dark and wonderful.
When I was a child—maybe four or five—my dad would sit me on his lap and read nonfiction books about dinosaurs to me. I couldn't read their names, but I learned to recognize the words by their shapes, almost as if they were pictographs. I was fascinated by the idea that these massive monsters had been real, that they had actually existed and might have walked the same ground as where my house now stood. More than real life monsters, they were also like ghosts—spirits of creatures who'd died long ago but still lingered, in the human imagination if nowhere else.
Around the same time, I watched Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man with my parents. My mom and dad didn't censor what I watched back then. If they watched it, I did, too. I was fascinated by the idea that these two monsters—both of which I knew starred in their own movies—not only inhabited the same universe but could actually meet, interact, and—best of all—battle to the death. After the movie, my dad taught me a simple way to draw the Wolf Man, and I still remember how to do it to this day, fifty years later.
When I was five, a friend showed me a book by Norman Bridwell, of Clifford the Big Red Dog fame. The book was How to Train Your Monster, and it was a guide for keeping a monster as your pet. I was desperate to have this book, and I traded my friend a bunch of baseball cards for it. (To this day, it’s still one of the best deals I ever made.) In first grade, I entered a contest to win tickets to see a high school play called The Ghoul Friend. I really wanted to see the play—after all, it had ghoul in the title—and when I won, I was ecstatic. The play turned out to be a Scooby-Doo-type story with no real monsters in it, but the costumes were great. 
As I grew, so too did my love of horror. I watched the weekly local horror movie program on TV—Shock Theater with Dr. Creep—religiously. I read Eerie Publications’ black-and-white horror comics, magazines with lurid, blood-soaked covers and titles like Tales of Voodoo, Terror Tales and Tales from the Tomb. And I devoured Warren Publishing’s horror magazines such as Creepy, Eerie, Vampirella, and the monster kid’s bible, Famous Monsters of Filmland. I loved DC Comics like House of Mystery and House of Secrets, and Marvel Comics like Tomb of Dracula and Werewolf by Night. For my birthday and Christmases, I asked for monster toys instead of bikes or sports equipment, and the first horror story I wrote was a comic-book version of King Kong vs, Godzilla—a film which I knew existed but had never seen—drawn on a stenographer's pad.
I started reading a lot of UFO and cryptid nonfiction books, my imagination captivated by the idea that these beings might actually exist. The book that had the most effect on me was john A. Keel’s The Mothman Prophecies, especially the last line, a quote attributed to Charles Fort: “If there is a universal mind, must it be sane?" That idea haunted me, and it's formed the basis of much of my horror fiction throughout my life.
As I headed toward my teenage years, I read about Richard Matheson’s I Am Legend, and Anne Rice's Interview with the Vampire, and I was thrilled to discover my local library had both. When I was in fifth grade, my father took me to see jaws, and I was traumatized by the film's unbearable suspense. I've had a love-hate relationship with sharks ever since. In seventh grade a friend told me about this really good book he was reading—Salem’s Lot by Stephen King. I got a copy and had never been so captivated by a story. Several years later, I would read an interview with King in the black-and-white horror magazine Dracula Lives, and I'd realize being a writer was something a person could choose to do, and I could choose it as well if I wanted.
In high school, right before Thanksgiving break one year, the faculty herded the students into the gym and showed us Psycho while they all went outside and smoked. I couldn't understand what the hell the teachers were thinking—Psycho wasn't exactly a family-friendly, holiday—themed movie—but I loved it. After high school I got to see the best (and not-so-best) eighties horror films in the theater, and when videotape players came on the market, I rented and watched every horror movie I could find.
I started writing seriously with the goal of becoming published when I was eighteen. By this time, I was reading more fantasy and science fiction than horror, and while I tried my hand at all three genres when it came to short fiction, for some reason I only tried to write fantasy and science fiction at novel length. This was during the legendary 1980's horror boom in publishing, and I sometimes wonder what might’ve happened if I'd written a horror novel back then and sent it off to an agent or editor. I went to college, eventually graduating with a bachelor's in education and a master's in English. I continued writing novels and stories and racking up rejections. More and more I began to gravitate toward writing horror at short length, although I still didn't attempt to write a horror novel. I’m not sure why. Sometimes I think that I loved horror so much that I was too intimidated to attempt a novel, afraid that I might mess it up.
I began teaching college writing part-time to support myself while I wrote. I found Ramsey Campbell's excellent collection Alone with the Horrors in the library of a college where I was teaching, and after reading it from cover to cover, I gained a better understanding of how to write short horror fiction, and my stories improved immeasurably. By this point, I began selling short stories to small-press markets, and my first professionally published piece—and the one where I first found my horror voice—was "Mr. Punch," which appeared in the anthology YoungB1ood. By this point, the earliest form of online communities began to emerge, and I joined the genie network, where many writers of Scifi slash Fantasy slash Horror hung out. I got to read the posts of professional writers and interact with them online, but while I enjoyed them all, the horror writers felt the most like my people. We seemed to look at the world in similar ways and loved the same books and films. 
I began going to SF conventions and speaking on panels. This led me to join a writers‘ group with the novelists Dennis L. McKiernan and Lois McMaster Bujold. I got an agent, thanks to a recommendation from Dennis, and he began shopping around some of my fantasy novels, but with no luck. I continued selling short fiction-most often horror—to both pro and small-press markets, and I began to wonder if I could take the kind of “Tim Waggoner" horror story I'd developed and write a novel-length work of fiction using the same approach. By this time-my early thirties—I was reading more horror than anything else, and after reading Douglas Clegg's You Come When I Call You and Tom Piccirilli's A Lower Deep, I felt I had a grasp on how to write a novel-length Tim Waggoner horror story. The result was The Harmony Society, the first of many horror novels I would go on to publish.
I'm in my fifties now, and I've published close to fifty novels and seven short story collections, a majority of them horror. I've been a two-time finalist for the Shirley Jackson Award, and I've been nominated for the Bram Stoker Award three times and won once. I'm not sure what kind of standing I have in the horror community. I've had people refer to me as an elder statesman of horror, and while I hope I'm not too elder yet, I appreciate the compliment. So one answer to why I write horror is that I've loved it all my life, and I grew into the writer I am just as I've grown into the man I've become—bit by bit, moment by moment. But there are darker reasons, too.
My mother was a depressive agoraphobic, and she never received treatment for her mental illness. She would have fainting spells once a month or so, and to this day I still jump when I hear a loud noise in the house, afraid that someone has fallen. My parents, without really meaning to, taught me and my siblings that the world is a dangerous place, always out to get you, always to be feared. When I was nine, I almost drowned (which is why water figures in my horror stories so often), and a few months later, my great uncle—who was like a second father to me—died suddenly. I was plunged into a two-year depression during which I struggled to come to terms with death. There's a scene in the movie Earth vs. the Spider where we're shown the destruction of a town caused by a giant arachnid. We're shown a blonde-haired boy with glasses (who looked a lot like me) crying, the only survivor. I realized then that the monsters I loved so much killed people, and that they made the survivors feel the same way I felt about losing my uncle. I've never looked at monsters the same way since. Nuclear war with Russia (then the Soviet Union) was still a very real possibility, and more of my older relatives died, one after the other. The Vietnam War was still going on when I was a child, and when I was a teenager, the Reagan years came along with the attendant economic hardships. And, of course, AIDs arrived as well. I suffered (and still do) from depression—yay, genetics!—as well as anxiety. I married an emotionally distant woman, and we had two daughters who I love deeply. When my first daughter was a few months old, I was diagnosed with testicular cancer, and the idea that I might die and leave my child without her father—and that I might miss her growing up—terrified me. Luckily, the cancer was caught in time, and I was fine. My marriage fell apart, and my wife and I divorced. I dated a series of women—some nice, some extremely strange-and I eventually fell in love with a wonderful woman who'd suffered a great deal of abuse in her past. From her, I learned what real trauma is and the kind of courage and strength it takes to survive and overcome it.
Horror movies, books, and comics gave me a love of horror tropes. My experience of the darker aspects of life—which we all must contend with to a greater or lesser degree—gave me an understanding of the dark emotional core necessary for producing truly effective horror fiction. I write horror because it stimulates my imagination like no other kind of fiction, and it speaks to the dark things inside me that I struggle to understand and come to terms with. I've taught composition and creative writing at the college level full time for the last twenty years. One year, my department chair and I attended a conference in Minneapolis. After a day wandering around the city sightseeing instead of going to conference sessions, my boss and I sat down in the hotel lobby. He was a literary guy, the kind of person who only believes a book is worthy if it gets a positive review in the New York Times. He asked me, with honest puzzlement in his voice, why I wrote horror. I thought for a moment before answering.
“Do you remember the banana we passed, the one that was lying on the sidewalk?"
He didn't.
“We passed it several times today. At first it was fine, but as the day went on, people stepped on it, and it got more and more squashed. I noticed it every time, and I can describe exactly what it looked like each time I saw it. That's the reason I write horror: I see the squashed bananas.”
My favorite answer to “Why I write horror?” is from Stephen King. When asked why he wrote about gruesome subjects, King once said, “What makes you assume that I have a choice?” In other words, I didn't choose the horror life; the horror life chose me. And I wouldn’t have it any other way.

PART TWO

Why Do I Want to Help You to Write Horror

I was probably nineteen, and I was sitting on the front porch of my parents’ house, looking at the field of corn across the road. We lived in the country, and back then, there were no houses on the other side of the road, just farmland. I don’t remember what I was doing or thinking. Probably not much of either. It was around 5:30 p.m., and I saw my dad's car coming down the road. I wasn't waiting for him specifically, but I was glad to see him. I watched as he pulled into our gravel driveway, drove up to the house—leaving clouds of white dust in his wake—and parked. When he came up the front walk, I saw that he was holding a thin paper sack in his hand with the word Wilkie's on it. Wilkie's was a bookstore in downtown Dayton, and Dad would stop there every now and again and buy a magazine for me, usually a copy of Famous Monsters. But today he brought me something different.
“I thought you might like this," he said as he handed me the bag.
I took it and pulled out a copy of a magazine called Writer's Digest. I had no idea magazines about writing existed, and I was thrilled. Dad knew I’d started writing, but he was a man of few words and hadn't really said much about it. The fact that he’d bought me this magazine was a huge sign of encouragement from him. He went inside, and I stayed on the porch and read that issue of Writer's Digest from cover to cover. I especially enjoyed Lawrence Block’s column on fiction writing, and after subscribing to the magazine, it was the first thing I read each month. Eventually, I sought out Block’s books on writing and devoured those, and I learned more from his writing about writing than from any teacher or class I ever had.
I was excited when J.N. Williamson's How to Write Tales of Fantasy, Horror, and Science Fiction was published, and then William F. Nolan‘s How to Write Horror Fiction. These weren't just how-to-write books—they were books about writing the kind of fiction I loved to read! I devoured these books as well, and read them over and over, trying to learn as much as I possibly could from them.
After graduating with a master's degree in English, I began teaching college writing courses while I worked on my fiction. But early on, I began writing articles on writing, too. I published my first such article, “Using Rejection,” in the online magazine Word Museum in 1 99 7. I went on to publish articles in Scavengers Newsletter, Speculations, The SIWA Bulletin, Writers journal, Ohio Writer, and eventually Writer's Digest itself. I enjoyed writing these articles. Not only were they fun to write, they made me think more deeply about writing, and I learned a lot from doing them. In 201 1, I started a blog called Writing in the Dark—which, of course, is where the title of this book came from—and that's where I do most of my writing about writing these days. Sure, my blog is a means to promote my fiction, but that's of secondary interest to me. I like helping people. It's why I became a teacher and why I've remained a teacher all these years.
A while back, I was one of the authors published by Sowin Books. The publisher arranged for a number of us to attend the Horror Hound convention to help sell and sign books. I didn't want to bring simple swag for readers—stuff like bookmarks and promotional postcards that no one cares about. I wanted to give people something they might actually want. I decided to create a handout for people interested in writing horror, which I called “The Extremely Short Guide to Writing Horror." It was a flop. Only a couple people took copies (although my fellow authors did). But I'm a big believer in recycling information, so I used the handout as a post on my blog, and then later developed it into a PowerPoint presentation I used for writing workshops at cons. For years, I'd toyed with the idea of writing my own how-to book, but I never felt like I'd learned enough about writing to give me the authority to do so. As the years passed, I wrote more articles and gave more presentations about writing horror, and somewhere along the way I guess I decided I was ready. You're holding the result in your hands. 
My hope is that this book will provide new horror writers with the tools needed to produce original stories that are frightening, entertaining, and well-written. But I also hope seasoned pros will find something useful here as well—information and ideas that might get them thinking about horror in a new way, or maybe just infuse them with fresh energy and enthusiasm for the genre we all love.
At the end of each chapter you'll find exercises and writing prompts to help you sharpen your craft and hopefully inspire you. If you teach or conduct workshops yourself, feel free to use this material—or any material in this book, for that matter—in your classes and sessions. After all, we have to make sure the darkness spreads and infects future generations, don't we?
One more thing . . .
As you make your way through this book, you'll notice I've used some examples—like the movie Jaws—more than once. Maybe it's because I have a limited imagination. Or I'm lazy. Or maybe I think it's useful to see the same examples presented in different contexts.
Yeah, you're right. I’m probably just lazy.

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

As a creative writing teacher, I appreciate it when students want to take more classes from me, but I always urge them to take classes from other writers as well. There's more than one way to skin Poe's black cat, and the more perspectives you can get on writing, the better. Even if they sometimes contradict each other. Especially then. I consider teaching to be like setting out a buffet. It's my job to put as many tasty dishes out as I can for you to choose from. But I'm far from the only cook in the kitchen, nor am I the most accomplished. So for this book, I wanted to bring in some more cooks to help me out. But who to ask and what to ask them? If I were a beginning horror writer, what would I want to know? The answer to this last question was easy. I'd want to know everything. But I'm not a beginner. I'm a busy pro, and I know what it's like to be sent an interview with twenty questions, all of which require detailed, thoughtful answers. It's work, and even if I want to answer them, I've got so much work of my own to do that it’s hard to find the time. So I decided to create two simple questions for my interviews. What do you think makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense, and what's the best advice you could give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense? And to make it even easier for people to respond, I'd tell them that I was only looking for short answers, just a couple sentences apiece (although they could write longer responses if they wished). And when I made that decision, I realized I could include more interviews in the book than I'd previously anticipated. A lot more. 
I asked as many people as I could think of to answer my questions, and while some regretted they were too busy to participate, most were kind enough to answer. I purposefully selected authors of many different types of horror—literary, extreme, supernatural, realistic, dark fantasy, pulp adventure . . . I wanted to make sure that the genre was represented in all its dark and glorious diversity. Brian Hodge called the bits of wisdom I gathered “flash interviews,” which I think is a cool term. I originally thought about putting the interviews in their own chapter at the end of the book, but imagining myself as reading the book, I thought it would be more effective to have the interviews spread throughout the text. So I've included a few at the end of each chapter. They’re in no particular order, and I didn't select them to match whatever a particular chapter's topic was. In a way, they're a parallel mini-book of their own, a collection of some of horror’s best—seasoned veterans, newcomers on the rise, and those in between. Sometimes they reinforce each other‘s advice—such as Read a lot—but I think that just shows you how important these writers think a specific aspect of craft is. Sometimes their views contradict each other, and that’s great. The more viewpoints about horror that you’re exposed to, the more it clarifies your own ideas and values on writing the stuff. I hope you find these snatches of advice interesting and useful—I know I did.
So as you make your way through this book, listen to these Voices from the Shadows. They've got a lot of dark and sinister wisdom to share.

CHAPTER ONE

WHY HORROR MATTERS

Years ago, a student asked me why I write horror. “You seem like such a pleasant person," she said. 
I looked into her eyes and smiled a slightly wicked smile. 
“Writing horror is what keeps me pleasant.”
We all have a dark side that whispers to us, a side that we struggle against and ultimately need to make peace with if we don't want it to destroy us. In many ways, that's probably the most primal story of humanity. Horror fiction gives us a safe way to explore and—hopefully—come to terms with our dark side. Horror stories allow us to confront our deepest fears through the buffer of fiction. Wrestling with the darkest questions of human existence—why is there violence, pain, cruelty, and death?—can be emotionally overwhelming. These questions can be too intense to deal with directly. Like an eclipse, the only way to safely view these aspects of life is indirectly. Horror allows us to do this. Horror can serve as a buffer in another way. It can distract us from the horrors of the real world, all of which are far more terrifying than any story about a ghost or vampire. Horror writers are like dark clowns that caper in front of our readers, making grotesque faces in the hope that the audience won't look over our shoulder and see the true darkness of existence behind us.
Not that most readers think that deeply when they pick up (or download) a horror book. They're looking to be entertained, and probably even more so with film and television horror. They want to enter a dark dream and experience the delightful frisson that comes from feeling they're in mortal danger, when in reality they're perfectly safe. It's the same for people who enjoy a trip through a carnival spookhouse. It's a fun experience that gets the blood pumping, that jolts people out of their everyday existence and—if only for a short time—makes them feel alive. And if this was all horror did, it would still be important. Who doesn't want to feel really alive? But even when it entertains, horror can do so much more, be so much more.
Horror is as much, if not more so, about individual characters’ experience than it's about whatever dark force confronts them. There's an old saying that an adventure is someone else having a hell of a tough time a thousand miles away. Any type of fiction can teach us more about ourselves and our fellow humans by showing us how particular characters deal with conflict—both external and internal. But horror turns up the conflict all the way to eleven. How do characters deal with the unknown, the impossible, the nightmarish? How do they deal with being exposed to—or tempted by—evil, whether demonic, mundane, or symbolic? What would we do in those situations? Would we be smarter, braver, more resistant to corruption? Would we be smart enough not to go into the dark basement, to resist opening the Necronomicon, to not invite the vampire into our house? Could we hold onto our sanity in the face of the awful things we encounter—or became? Psychologists suggest that reading and watching horror allow people to develop stronger survival skills. We engage in fictional scenarios to explore what we would do in dangerous situations.
How many of you have spent time arguing with friends about the best way to survive a zombie apocalypse or how you'd react during a home invasion by a Michael Meyers-like serial killer? All fiction can make people more empathetic by simply dropping us into a character's life and allowing us to experience how he or she tries to deal with problems. But horror fiction allows us to follow characters pushed to the absolute limits of human experience and beyond. The more pain—of all sorts—a character experiences in a story, the greater our empathy for that character. Horror also allows for deep catharsis. The ending of the movie jaws is a perfect example. After an entire film dealing with an implacable inhuman force, Sheriff Brody—clinging to the mast of the sinking Orca and literally in the shark's environment—manages to kill the beast at the last moment. And the resultant explosion is a huge catharsis. When characters not only survive but triumph against dark forces, we feel relief. We also feel that if characters in a story can do it, maybe we can too in real life. But good horror isn't predictable, isn't safe. Maybe the heroes succeed in banishing the evil, maybe they don't. Maybe they're defeated by it, changed by it, become part of it. Or maybe they only believe they've won, but it's a temporary victory at best because the evil returns in the sequel. (I contend that this, aside from being a marketing tactic, reflects how we deal with darkness in our own lives.
We can never banish it entirely. The best we can manage is a holding action or temporary respite until it returns, and it will keep returning until it finally claims us. How's that for a cheery thought?) Uncertain outcomes like these keep readers and viewers on their toes mentally and force them to deal with the more complex and mixed emotions uncertain endings bring.
Horror also offers another kind of catharsis. We get the chance to experience what it’s like to be the monster, to not be constrained by morality or even our humanity. We can stalk, torture, maim, kill, despoil souls, destroy worlds, all without ever committing an actual act of violence in the real world. We can get in touch with our dark side, explore it, map it, acknowledge it . . . and once we do, it ceases to have power over us. Or at least, its power is lessened. We're no longer afraid of thinking “bad” thoughts or imagining “bad” things. It's like The Purge, only without all the blood, death, and screaming. Horror can be deeply existential, too. How can we mere mortals hope to defeat all the things that make up Darkness with a capital D: death, disease, violence, temptation, degradation, insanity? What does it mean to be human in a world where the dead can return to life and seek to drain your blood or devour your flesh? What does it mean when otherworldly forces—infinitely more powerful than we are—seek to destroy or dominate us? What does it mean to be human when the monster is inside us, growing stronger every moment? The vast majority of audience members don't think this consciously about the horror they consume as entertainment. But subconsciously? I believe they do engage with the existential questions horror raises on that level, just below the surface of everyday normal thought.
Horror can provide comfort for the weird ones among us. (And I count myself as a member of this tribe.) With horror's focus on monstrous distortion—on Otherness—those of us who for one reason or another don't fit into society’s paradigm of normal can find a place to belong. My wife once told me, “You talk about monsters as if they‘re your best friends." That's because in many ways they are. A lot of you reading this chapter might be thinking that literature of any sort has the potential to do all the things I've discussed so far—and you're right. This proves my ultimate point. Horror is literature, and it's just as important and vital as any other type for the health and growth of humans and their culture. This sounds cool and all, you might be thinking, but l like to read and write horror because it's fun. There's nothing wrong with fun. If we didn’t have fun from time to time, imagine how miserable our lives would be. But I believe even popular fiction meant primarily for entertainment can fulfill a higher purpose, too. We all know that entertainment can provide an escape from our everyday lives, but it wasn't until my senior year in high school that I truly understood what this meant.
There was a small bookstore in the town next to ours. (This was back in the pre-Amazon past, when such places still existed.) My dad and I were browsing the bookshelves, and I was happily surprised to see a new novel by Piers Anthony in his Xanth series called Centaur Aisle. I'd loved the first three books in the series and had no idea there was going to be a fourth. Dad and I went up to the register, and when he saw the book I was holding, he asked, “Do you mind if I read it first?" I was shocked. In my family, whoever bought a book was always the first one to read it. No exceptions. My mother—who suffered from a number of health problems—was scheduled for surgery the next day. The procedure wasn't a very serious one (or so my parents claimed), but I understood then that my father was worried, and he wanted something to distract him in the hospital during my mother's surgery and recovery. I said yes, of course. And I realized then that popular fiction of all kinds-fiction written to be fun—has a profound power. It can provide comfort to someone who's scared. It can take someone’s mind off their worries, help them get through some of the hardest times in their life. Before we move on to the next chapter, I want you to understand that not only do horror writers work in a genre with a long and rich history, the stories we create perform numerous important functions for people as individuals and for civilization as a whole. So if anyone ever asks you why you're wasting your time writing horror instead of “real” fiction, tell them, “Horror is as real as it gets, baby." For good measure, hiss and bare your fangs, then get back to work.

EXERCISES

1. 

Spend some time writing about why horror matters to you. What do you like/dislike about it? This will help clarify what you value most about horror, as well as identify themes and story structures you’d like to explore.

2. 

Imagine the ideal reader for your horror fiction. Describe this person in writing. What sort of responses do you want them to have to your fiction? What can you do in your stories to ensure your reader responds the way you want? Pick a story you've written previously and revise it to strengthen the response of your ideal reader.

VOICES FROM THE Shadows

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense? 

Ellen Datlow, award-winning editor of The Best Horror of the Year

1. 

First of all, the same elements that make any good fiction: a fresh way of looking at common tropes by putting your story into an unusual setting, with characters who are interesting, and a plotline that does something different. And of course, suspense and a sense of dread.

2. 

Read read read. Read horror, read in other genres, read some nonfiction. And try to discern what it is about the writers whose work you love that makes you want to read their work, and continue reading it.

Usman T. Malik, award-winning author of The Pauper Prince and the Eucalyptus jinn

1. 

The creation of good horror relies on honing a sense for the uncanny and the trapping of that feeling, like an elusive night bird, onto the page. Think of an arrow about to be loosened: there is the arrow (the story or the character); the paced, precise draw of the bowstring (atmospheric, calculated relevant action); the loosening (the reader or character's sudden realization that something is very wrong and inevitable); and the target (the denouement, arrival of the uncanny/horrible). Every archer has their own way of getting the job done; the best have both talent and practice on their side.

2. 

You do not necessarily need to focus on the horror. Instead focus on the characters and their setting. Pit them against themselves, against each other, and against the setting, then sit back and watch what happens. Also, read David G. Hartwell’s landmark anthology The Dark Descent cover to cover to get a sense of how broad, clever, and cognitive horror literature can be.

Craig DiLouie, author of One of Us

1. 

Good horror fiction is a story that successfully conveys feelings of fear, dread, or dismay, but what’s key is how we get there. Besides the basics of good storytelling, for me what stands out the most is character, the monster element, and truth. Character comes first because everything hinges on it. Some horror stories put the monster element out first, which can be titillating but not necessarily horrifying. By delivering likeable, relatable characters and a deep point of view, the reader will empathize with the hero, and thereby immerse in the story to experience it firsthand. The quality of the monster element and its contrast with its backdrop is also key to good horror. The problem with the genre is so many of its greatest monsters have become clichés, demanding a fresh take. Whatever monster is chosen, the author should make it their own, either by producing something new, innovating on the familiar, or dropping the familiar into a fresh environment. Then comes delivery—how will the monster manifest? Stephen King identified three types of terror: the gross-out (e.g., blood splatters from a hacking blade), the horror (e.g., a spider the size of a car), and the terror (e.g., a child's voice singing from inside a bricked-up wall), which obviously can be used singly or in combination in a good story. Put another way, how tangible or direct is the threat, and how much is left to the reader's imagination? The only right answer is the author making choices and staying true to them. Which brings up the last major element, which is truth. The author must decide whether their story is a horror story at its black heart, or another type of story with a horror element in it. The reader should find frightening what the characters find frightening. The setting should be realistic to aid willing suspension of disbelief for the monster element. And often, especially for "big horror," the story should tie into a theme that ideally will unsettle the reader by making them think about an uncomfortable aspect of the world, human nature, or even themselves.

2. 

Know the essence of the story you want to tell, put character and story first, render realism in both the setting and character reactions to events, make the monster element your own, and tell a story that is true to itself. Balance the scares with happier scenes and even humor to allow the reader to blow off steam and put them on a roller coaster. Make it fresh, make the reader feel, make the reader think. Write always, read everything. And most of all, have fun.

Matthew M. Bartlett, author of The Stay-Awake Men: Other Unstable Entities

1. 

What makes good horror? People may tell you that it's plot, pacing, and relatable, believable characters. While those aspects may be important to some stories, and some kinds of stories, in my view they are secondary (at best) to atmosphere, imagery, and the creation of dread through the skewing or outright removal of what is in consensus thought of as reality.

2. 

What's the best advice you can give someone on writing effective horror? Read the genre, but read outside the genre as well. Read nonfiction. Read poetry especially. Be greedy for words, for well-crafted sentences and passages. Go to a museum, or to the art section of any book store for inspiration. Write as often as you can, keeping notes on your phone or a real—life notepad. Go out among people and keep yourself open—in the present moment—to all you see and hear and smell. The world is your fodder.

Bryan Smith, author of Merciless

1. 

Good horror starts with characters that feel like real people. Fully-realized characters allow for an emotional connection that wouldn't otherwise be there. Gore and extreme content are perfectly viable ingredients for an effective horror story, but gore and extreme content by itself isn't enough. It needs that palpable human element to mean anything. Horror is an expansive genre. It can be wildly entertaining and dig deeper into the human condition at the same time. The best modern horror stories are, in my opinion, the ones that best manage this balancing act. Again, keep it real. You can write about bloody Satanic orgies, monster rampages, or what-have-you, but it works better if the author subtly grounds the gruesome events in recognizable reality. Small sensory details can make all the difference. The smell of cigarette smoke and bacon frying in a lonely roadside diner at 2 a.m. Drizzling cold rain raising goosebumps on the flesh of a stranded motorist as a stiffening breeze carries a faint scent of rotting flesh. Also important are everyday mundane details. Financial worries. Relationship difficulties. The various ordinary ways people can feel disappointed or let down by life. This doesn't mean your story has to descend into melodrama, but definitely include enough of this sort of thing to make your characters more three-dimensional. A little of it here and there can go a long way. Then when the time comes to start spraying the blood around, the carnage feels more like it means something. Also, don't get hung up on finding the exact right word to perfectly describe a thing in your first draft. Just write and get the story told. If you can do that, you'll have an easier time finding that perfect word in the revisions phase.

CHAPTER TWO

THINGS UNKNOWN

One summer, I was teaching at a writing workshop with the literary writer Clint McCowan. One day while we were eating lunch, Clint said, "You know, all fiction is mystery.” He wasn't referring to the genre, of course, but to the questions that lie at the heart of every good story. What's happening? Why is it happening? What's going to happen next? And—especially in horror—how much worse is it going to get? It’s the sense of the unknown, of readers discovering a story one bit of information at a time instead of simply being provided a dry summary of it, that makes all fiction compelling. Fear of the unknown is at the core of all good horror fiction. Horror allows us to exercise our imagination in ways other genres can't. The Dark is a vast blank canvas upon which our imaginations can paint. Anything could be lurking in the shadows . . . anything at all. This is why darkness—the night, shadows, a full eclipse-is such a prominent trope in horror. To humans, who rely on vision as our primary sense, not being able to see what might be in the dark—watching us, preparing to attack us—is unsettling if not downright terrifying. Alien beings who might primarily rely on other senses such as smell or hearing might find lack of scent or silence highly disturbing.
I don't really label my horror in any specific ways, although readers, editors, and reviewers have called it surreal horror, nightmare horror, weird horror, and dark fantasy. And several of my short stories have appeared in volumes of Year’s Best Hardcore Horror. Any of these labels is fine with me, but I just think of my fiction as being my horror, fiction where the psychological states of characters are mirrored in the outer world—sometimes figuratively, sometimes quite literally. When I write this kind of horror, I walk a fine line between explaining exactly what is happening and making it seem plausible and allowing the images and concepts to speak for themselves without much, if any explanation. Not every reader or editor likes my approach to horror, but it's worked pretty well for me over the last twenty-five years. But it first appeared in my work about thirty-three years ago, in a story that wasn’t horror at all.
I was an undergrad in college. We're talking mid-eighties here. I wrote a short story whose title escapes me now. I have a vague memory of calling it “The Clearwater Monster,” but it could just as easily have been titled something else. But I certainly remember the story’s plot. It concerned two young boys who live near Lake Clearwater. One of the boys has a fanciful imagination (I wonder where I got that idea) and he likes to make up stories about a monster living in the lake and pretend that there really is one. The imaginative boy drowns in the lake one day, and his friend grieves. Years later, the friend-now an adult—returns to Lake Clearwater for the first time since the imaginative boy died so many years ago. The friend looks out upon the lake and is amazed and delighted to see a monster, just like the one the imaginative boy described, swimming in the water. He believes the monster is a manifestation of the boy's spirit, who’s made his stories become reality and who's appeared to say a last farewell to his old friend. I showed this story to a guy I worked with at the university writing center. We'll call him Bill. Bill read the story and gave me two pieces of feedback. One was that I should specify where the lake was located. I hadn't done this because I wanted to create an almost fairy-tale sense that Clearwater could be any lake, anywhere. “But you have to say where the lake is,” Bill told me. “You’re an American writer and all American writers are regionalists." (And that, boys and girls, is why you shouldn't take Lit majors too seriously.) The second bit of feedback focused on the story's ending, where the grown-up friend sees the lake monster swimming by, as if purposefully putting on a show for him. “It doesn't make sense,” Bill said. I explained my concept to him and said that I didn't want to over-explain it in the story because I felt doing so would rob the final image—and the character's emotional reaction to it—of its impact. Bill insisted that the ending needed to be clearer, and since the story was an experiment for me, I figured I'd try to do what Bill suggested and see how it turned out. Giving Lake Clearwater a specific location was easy. I lived—and still live—in Southwestern Ohio, so that became my lake's home. But as far as explaining the ending, everything I tried only made the story worse. A lot worse. Instead of depicting a moment of magic in a person's life, a brief instant when he felt connected to his childhood friend once more, the ending became bogged down with authorial narration, and the more concrete reasons I provided for the lake monster’s manifestation, the less magical the image seemed. Eventually, I said to hell with it and gave up on the story entirely. My creative instincts told me that my original approach was the right one, but the rational part of my mind decided Bill was right, my instincts sucked, and I moved on to other stories. Bill’s feedback wasn't the only reason I abandoned the story. I’d read a ton of how-to-write books back then. (This was long before the current wave of self-publishing, when only professional authors wrote writing guides.) So many of the books and articles I'd read advised beginning writers to always be specific, never vague, and they advised writers to avoid such literary tricks as leaving a story ending up to the reader to decide. They also warned that purposefully making a story too abstract didn't make you brilliant. It meant you were an artistic poseur. But as I kept writing, my urge to write these kinds of abstract, imagistic stories grew, and from time to time, I'd give it another try. But when I did, I always made sure to offer at least some explanation/justification for the story’s central image. A couple of these stories sold to small-press magazines, back when the small press was really small, but most didn't sell at all. 
And then one day when I was twenty-nine, I decided to submit a story to a pro-level horror anthology called Young Blood. The concept behind the anthology was that all the stories in it had to have been written before the author's thirtieth birthday. I wrote a story about a monster tree called “Yggdrasil” that was quickly rejected. Then I wrote a story called “Mr. Punch." It was a total trust-my-instincts story, and when I received feedback from friends that the ending needed to be explained more clearly, I didn't listen. I submitted “Mr. Punch,” the editor bought it, and it became my first professional sale. Later, Ellen Datlow selected it as one of her honorary mentions in The Year's Best Fantasy and Horror. I continued writing and selling such stories, ones that—as a colleague at the college where I teach once told me—center on the “logic of the image.” Eventually, I tried to write this kind of story at novel length. The result was The Harmony Society, which was followed by my first Leisure Books release Like Death. Today, thirty-something years after writing about the Lake Clearwater Monster, this is the type of horror fiction I'm known for, stories that have garnered awards and appeared in various Year's Best anthologies. Even so, I still occasionally have editors ask me to explain my stories’ central concepts a bit more. Sometimes I make changes, sometimes I don't. It depends on whether I think a clearer explanation will make a story better.
I can write stories that are clear and easy to understand. I do it all the time when I write urban fantasy or tie-in novels. But there are very specific reasons why I think over-explaining can be death for a horror story. (See what I did there?) Let me tell you why. “The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown."—H.P. Lovecraft
If you're a horror writer, you've likely seen this quote a jillion times before. The word unknown is key here. Vampires ceased being scary as fictional characters long ago. They're too known. Not only do readers—especially rabid horror fans—know everything about basic vampire lore, they've been exposed to images of vampires in media since they were kids. When it comes to horror, over-explaining and over-familiarity have killed vampires (and werewolves and ghosts and . . .) with more finality than sunlight and wooden stakes ever could. This is why vampires relocated to urban fantasy and romance. Vampires are now primarily adventure and romance characters. They aren't Monsters with a capital M. By not over-explaining a supernatural entity in a story—perhaps not even naming it—you keep readers guessing, keep them uncertain, make them uncomfortable, make your story not safe . . . Do these things, and you're harnessing the power of the Unknown. I know this sounds counterintuitive, but hear me out. Imagine yourself as a character in a horror story. You're driving down a country road in the middle of the night, and you see a full moon in the sky. You find this strange because you could’ve sworn a full moon isn't due for a couple more weeks. You peer at this unexpected moon through your windshield, only to see its lid rise upward, revealing a single, horrible gigantic eye gazing down at you. Do you really think you'd ever be able to understand what was happening? That you could pull over to the side of the road, park, grab your phone and do a Google search for “humungous moon eye" and a web page would pop up telling you exactly what the monstrous eye is and precisely what to do to defeat it? Hell, no! In real life, weird stuff happens all the time, and we hardly ever know for certain why it happens the way it happens. We just try to deal with it the best we can. The movie Sinister is a great example of unnecessary and story-damaging over-explaining. The monstrous fiend in the film is called Mr. Boogie (as in Boogeyman, of course), and the events that he causes to happen are creepy as hell—until our hero consults a college professor who explains that Mr. Boogie is really an ancient god called Bagul who collected the souls of human children a thousand years ago.

Yawn.

Mr. Boogie was scary when he was a thing, a creature of unknown abilities and motivations, who might not have any motivation, at least none mere humans could ever understand. But Bagul? He’s just a fifth-rate god in some obscure mythology text. What could be more dull? over-explaining kills any sense of mystery in a story. There's mystery in the Xenomorph in Alien. Not so much in the sequel Aliens. In that movie, the Xenomorphs are more numerous, easier to kill (at least as individuals), and their capabilities and life cycle are much better understood by Ripley (though not completely). The Xenomorph in Alien is a monster. The Xenomorphs in Aliens and every other sequel are basically animals. You could replace them with a pack of hyper-aggressive wolves and get pretty much the same story. 

Alien: 

What is this thing? Where did it come from? What does it want? What can it do? How does it hunt? Reproduce? What can it do to me? How can I kill it? 

Aliens: 

“Look, Xenomorphs!” Colonial Marines fire a shitload of bullets at Xenos, tearing them to shreds. Now I love Aliens, and while I think of it as an action-adventure movie with monsters, I don't consider it horror. Horror-adjacent at best. Want an example of a fantastic horror story that is drenched in mystery and the unknown? Read Jack Ketchum’s "The Box.” You can also watch a great film adaptation of the story as one part of the anthology film XX. Sometimes readers (and viewers) don't respond well to stories that are only metaphor, so giving them some explanation can help. It's like Mary Poppins‘ spoonful of sugar—it helps the medicine go down. After l saw Darren Aronofsky’s Mother in the theater, I had to hit the restroom. The guy using the urinal next to me asked if I’d just seen the movie and if so, did I know what it was about? I told him what I thought, he told me his theory, and then when we finished and our hands were washed, he went into the hallway to look for other people who'd seen the movie to find out what they thought it meant. While it was weird to have a discussion with a stranger about a movie while we were both peeing, it was a good example of an audience member who was almost desperate for a little more guidance in how to view a story. So while I complained about the Bagul stuff in Sinister earlier, a line or two that at least hints at an explanation can go a long way to help audiences who need something to hang onto when reading (or watching) a weird story.
I like stories that stimulate my imagination. Explanations-especially unnecessarily detailed ones-—don't feed my imagination. On the contrary, they starve it. They keep me outside a story, when as an audience member, I want to be inside, interacting with it intellectually and emotionally. Remember our old friend Mr. Boogie? For most of Sinister, he was a mysterious, malign, inhuman presence, and this invited me to try to imagine what he might be, what he could do, and what he wanted. But when I was told that he was just another pagan god, there was nothing left for my imagination to work with. The script told me what the story was instead of allowing me to help make the story. People attempt to define the difference between simplistic fiction meant solely for mindless entertainment and stories that strive to achieve more artistic goals. I'd say that inviting the audience to collaborate in the creation of the story by allowing room for their imaginations to interact with the text (or film), instead of merely spoon feeding them everything, is a pretty damn good definition. You don't need to write stories with supernatural elements to use the power of the unknown in your fiction. In “The Tale-Tell Heart," Edgar Allan Poe doesn't explain the origin of his unnamed narrator's madness, how the narrator (who could be either male or female) came to live with the old man he or she killed. Poe doesn't explain who the narrator is telling the story to or why it's so important to the narrator that his or her audience believes he or she is sane. There's nothing supernatural in that story, but there's plenty that’s unknown. Same with Shirley Jackson's “The Lottery." We don't know how or why the lotteries started or how common they once were (although we're told some towns are giving them up). In Ambrose Bierce's “An Incident at Owl Creek Bridge,” there's no explanation for the main character's experience (although an explanation can be inferred by the reader). In John Carpenter's classic film Halloween, there's no reason for Michael Meyer's murderous rampage, and that’s where the movie's horror comes from. This flirts with the supernatural—especially the ending—but isn't explicitly supernatural. There's nothing wrong with stories that are designed primarily to be fun, though. I've written two creature-feature novels for Severed Press—The Teeth of the Sea and Blood Island—and I created them solely to be enjoyable pulp adventure-horror. There's no great mystery to them, no strange imagery or ideas dredged up from my subconscious, nothing but monsters chomping on people and people trying to escape being chomped. But these books are the kind of thing readers read once and then forget about. These stories don't have any impact on readers, don't make them think or feel, and—most importantly to me—they don't stimulate readers’ imaginations in any meaningful way. They’re the simplest kind of horror, Goosebumps for adults. They're fun, but that's all they are.
If you want to write more challenging horror stories—stories which I think get closer to the dark heart of what horror is instead of merely using horror tropes to create only simple entertainment—try playing around with how much, or how little, you explain the weirdness in your stories and see what happens. Who knows? You'll at least add to your toolbox of narrative techniques for writing horror, and you might just find a brand-new writer's voice for yourself as well.

EXERCISES

1. 

Come up with alternative symbols for the unknown instead of darkness or anything having to do with the absence of light. These symbols could be drawn from the world's mythologies—meaning you'll have to do a bit of research—or they could be very personal symbols that you associate with the unknown.

2. 

Choose three random items—for example, a stop sign, an unlit candle, a bit of graffiti spray-painted on an overpass—and make notes for how you might be able to use these items as symbols of the unknown in a story. Then write the story.

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Graham Masterton, award-winning author of Dead Men Whistling

1

Originality makes good horror. Forget about vampires and werewolves and zombies . . . the world's mythology is crowded with terrifying demons and ghosts and other scary manifestations. When I published The Manitou back in 1 975, there were no horror novels around about Native American demons, and it sold spectacularly well, apart from being picked up almost immediately for a movie with Tony Curtis in the lead role. Since The Manitou I have drawn on demons from Japan (Tengu), the Middle East (The Djinn and The Sleepless), Mexico (The Pariah), Bali (Death Mask), and Poland (Forest Ghost). The only time I have written about vampires was a novel about how the Germans used vampires in World War Two to hunt down Resistance movements . . . but the vampires in this novel (Descendant) were based entirely on the original Romanian strigoi and never swept around in long cloaks puncturing young women's necks with their incisors. Instead, they sliced them open and drank from their main arteries as if they were refreshing themselves at a drinking fountain. So . . . always come from left field, and startle your readers with something totally new.

2

I have written some novels which might be construed as fantasy . . . the Night Warriors series of four novels in which ordinary people are recruited to fight evil presences in other people's dreams. On the whole, though, I think that horror novels are much more frightening if the characters and the backgrounds are highly realistic and very believable. Very few of my characters are heroic. Harry Erskine, the hero of The Manitou was a fake fortune-teller who suddenly found himself confronted with a real supernatural threat. My newest horror novel Ghost Virus features two of the most ordinary police officers you could ever meet, in a dull suburban setting in South London. If the characters and the setting are believable, then the supernatural threat is all the more scary when it makes its appearance.

Nicole Cushing, award-winning author of A Sick Gray Laugh

1

Originality. Too many books tread on land that was already cleared decades earlier. The good ones might start out in such a base camp, but soon march forward into unexplored territory, machete in hand, to blaze a new trail. Here are the names of some of my favorite trailblazers, past and present, foreign and domestic: Leonid Andreyev, Octavia Butler, Brian Evenson, Sadegh Heclayat, Glen Hirshberg, Shirley Iackson, Caitlin R. Kiernan, Thomas Ligotti, and Hagiwara Sakutaro.

2. 

Syntax, grammar, vocabulary, etc. are your tools, so you should be as well-schooled in their use as an artist is with his paint and brushes or a filmmaker is with her camera and lighting. Allowing several typos to survive all the way through to the published edition of a book is like letting the boom microphone drift into multiple shots of a movie. The crispness of your prose, the believability of your characters and settings, the logic of your plot—these are all your production values. Master them and you might write the literary equivalent of The Birds. Fail to master them and you might write the literary equivalent of Birdemic.

Craig Spector, bestselling author of Turnaround

1. 

To me, good horror is something that gets under the skin of the characters: it has an intimacy, regardless of the scope and scale of the ghastly events. Good horror shocks and unsettles, and lingers long after. It can be “loud” or “quiet,” but it resonates either way. Good horror rocks.

2. 

Write from the inside out. Crawl inside your characters, make us care about them living, then we'll care about them dying. Very few people are villains in their own minds, even if they're villains on the page. Dare to walk that line. Scare yourself first. Be fearless in exploring your fear. Be ruthless in exploring dark truths. And have fun with it.

Gary McMahon, award-winning author of At Home in the Shadows

1. 

I'll keep my answers focused on horror, because that's primarily what I write. To me, the essence of good written horror is atmosphere. Horror doesn't work without it. Whether that means a sense of mounting dread, a slow accumulation of creeping terror, or simply a sense of “spookiness/' it all boils down to the same thing: creating and maintaining atmosphere. That takes great skill, so the writing needs to be well crafted and polished to make it work.

2. 

This might seem controversial, but the best advice I can give is learn to write. So much horror I've come across is badly written, puerile, poorly conceived and executed, and reads as if it was created in a hurry. Take your time. Learn the craft. Write always from a place of integrity. Good horror is as good as any literary fiction I've encountered; bad horror is the worst kind of writing I've ever seen. 

Norman Prentiss, editor of Cemetery Dance Publications, Electronic Books Division

I. 

For me, the best horror story is a seance. That is, instead of simply dropping a ghost into the story, the author performs the necessary ritual, in words, to summon the ghost: creating the proper tensions among characters, building atmosphere, establishing a world view that invites a supernatural presence. This strategy can be especially difficult within the economy of the short story form, but ultimately increases a reader's belief in whatever creatures appear in the story—and actually, where I refer to ghosts generally, it applies equally to any blend of supernatural or non-supernatural “human monster." I'm not much of a coffee drinker, but to try another analogy, it's the difference between instant coffee and fresh-brewed. The “instant monster" isn't nearly as tasty.

2. 

Take your time. Take your time within the story to create the proper environment for horror. But also take your time to get published. Don't submit stories to magazines/webzines until they're ready, because the worst thing that could happen would be for a below-average story to get published under your byline, to haunt you for the rest of your career. Don't self-publish unless your fiction is thoroughly polished. And don't worry if your print publisher doesn’t get things out quickly enough: that simply gives you more time to have a follow-up novel or collection ready to go!

CHAPTER THREE

EVERYTHING YOU KNOW IS WRONG

The title of this chapter encapsulates a fundamental truth of horror fiction: horror comes from a violation of what characters perceive to be reality. This is why crime stories—a.long with mysteries, thrillers, and to a certain degree suspense stories—aren’t horror. The things that happen in these stories are part of the real world. Organized crime figures, hit men, drug runners, bank robbers, murderers, terrorists, abusers, revenge-seekers . . . We may not have encountered any of these things ourselves (at least I hope none of you have!), but we're all familiar with them, have seen news reports about them. They’re known. And remember what I said about the known in the last chapter. We might be afraid of the known, but it's the unknown that inspires the deepest, strongest fear in us.
But this doesn't mean realistic horror, for lack of a better term, can't be effective. A story doesn't need supernatural entities to be horror-but it does need to violate reality in ways that aren't familiar to readers, ways that approach the unreal and which cause us to react in disbelief and ask ourselves, How could that possibly happen? Monsters don't have to be creatures. They’re the embodiment of distortion, of veering away from the normal. “Monsters” don't even have to be embodied in physical form. A situation can be monstrous all by itself. In Black Ketchum’s legendary novel The Girl Next Door, which is based on a true story, a young girl is held captive and tortured in a neighbor's basement. Many of the kids in the neighborhood know about this, even participate in the girl‘s torture, without ever telling their parents or trying to help her. The reality of suburban life is horribly distorted in this novel, to the point of being nightmarish. What we thought we knew about human nature—ours, our family members’, our neighbors’—turns Out to be wrong in all kinds of awful ways. A different kind of psychological distortion occurs in the movie Compliance, also based on a true story. A person claiming to be a cop calls a fast-food restaurant and tells the boss that one of her employees is guilty of theft. The cop tells the boss to take the employee into a back room, keep her there, and interrogate her for him until he can get there. The cop continues calling, making the boss increase the severity of the interrogation step by step. The situation becomes increasingly nightmarish as the movie goes on.
It's the distortion, the violation of what we think of as the rules of reality—of society, of nature, of humanity, of physics, of space and time—that engenders horror. And regardless of what type of horror story you're writing, it’s this violation that should lay at the core of your concept. How far an audience is willing to follow you depends on how elastic their imagination is—or how well you tell your story (but that's a topic for a later chapter). Once people believed that vampires, werewolves, ghosts, witches, and demons existed, that these dark forces could enter our world to prey on us. But after more than a century of these creatures being fodder for books, movies, cartoons, comics, toys, and Halloween decorations, they’re an everyday part of our reality. A safe, known part. The mere concept of such creatures is no longer a violation of reality. (I'll discuss ways of refurbishing old terrors like these in another chapter.) A lot of people can't bring themselves to accept the existence of something so patently ridiculous as a vampire. But a psychotic neighbor who kidnaps a kid for torture or a sick prank caller who manipulates people into committing horrific acts? They have no trouble believing in these things. Other audience members can suspend their disbelief much further and are only too happy to accept tales of unearthly beings and dark magic—as long as they're not too familiar, and if they avoid retreading the same well-worn ground. One type of violation isn’t better than another. So long as you hit that nightmarish sweet spot with your story, you’re good. Regardless of how realistic or unrealistic your horror is, the violation of reality sends the same message to the characters in your tales and the people who read or watch them, whether this message is overt or subtle: The Universe is not orderly and benign, and is in fact chaotic and malicious. This is the terrible revelation that lies at the core of all horror fiction, and it’s what differentiates it from other types. So what does this mean for you as a writer? It means you should seek ideas that embody this core “truth” in order to build your fiction, then look for and stress those elements of violation in the story, perhaps distorting them even further until they begin to take on a nightmarish aspect. An example from my own writing: Several years ago, after dropping off my youngest daughter at middle school, I was driving home when I passed a young girl walking on the sidewalk. She looked to be around the same age as my daughter, had the same color of hair, and was dressed similarly. I only saw the girl from the back, and when I drove past her, I tried to see her features in the rear view mirror, but they were too indistinct. I knew the girl wasn't my daughter. There was no possible way for her to have gotten from her school to the place where I saw the girl in the time it took me to drive there. But what if it was her? I asked myself. A seeming violation in reality and a momentary musing on it became a story called “For She Is Fearfully and Wonderfully Made.”
A couple words of advice on using violations of reality in fiction. In general, the more realistic-seeming the violation, the easier it will be for people to accept, and thus the greater your chance at reaching a wider audience. The more bizarre or outlandish the violation, the smaller your potential audience. As a rule of thumb, one main violation per story is enough. This goes for both short fiction and novels (and films, games, etc.). A violation is like the trunk of a tree from which branches grow and split off, but it's still one tree. The Overlook Hotel in Stephen King's The Shining is a battery that stores negative emotions. In Salem’s Lot, one vampire comes to town and causes an outbreak of the undead. One devil-like figure plagues Castle Rock in Needful Things. Even in a surreal work like John Carpenter's film In the Mouth of Madness, the breakdown in reality is caused by a single thing: allowing Lovecraftian gods to enter our dimension. As much as I loved Universal’s monster rally movies like House of Frankenstein and House of Dracula when I was a kid, putting Dracula, Frankenstein's monster, and the Wolf Man into the same films diluted the impact of each monster as an individual violation of reality. In many ways, these films—and ones like them—were the precursors to modern-day urban fantasy and paranormal romance. If you've read any of my horror novels, you know that a lot of weird stuff happens in them, but I always try to have a single violation of reality at the center of a story from which all the weirdness sprouts. Because of this, some people consider my work as much dark fantasy as horror, and I'm cool with this. Not sure whether your idea is best suited for a short story, novella, or novel? Just ask yourself how many branches the trunk of the idea can support. Hell, draw the tree and label the branches to give yourself a visual representation. If it's only one or two branches, then you’ve got a short story concept. If it's a half dozen, maybe it's a novella. If it's a dozen or more, you might have a novel idea on your hands.
No matter what kind of horror story you're writing—supernatural, weird, psychological, dark fantasy, or realistic—it all begins with a violation of reality. So get out there and start violating!
(Hmmm. Maybe I should rephrase that . . .)

EXERCISES

1. 

Many years ago, I read an interview with Stephen King in which he said he got his ideas by looking at something and telling himself: “Something is wrong with that." Make a list of people, places, things, and situations. These can be things important to you, things you can see in your immediate vicinity, or any random thing that pops into your mind. When you've got a decent-sized list, go through it and tell yourself that something is wrong with each item, come up with what that something is, and write it down. The Something Wrong can be as simple as "I think that coffee mug is listening to our conversation" or as complex as “The parking lot is filled with white cars. The drivers must belong to the same sinister organization." Select the best Something Wrongs from your list and use them as the basis for stories.

2. 

Spend an entire day telling yourself that something is wrong with everything you see, hear, taste, touch, and smell. Ask yourself what those Something Wrongs are and write them down on a notepad or in your phone. Train yourself to always be aware of the possibility that something is wrong in the world around you. (But only as an aid to storytelling. Don't make yourself crazy!)

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Lisa Morton, award-winning author of Calling the Spirits: A History of Seances

1. 

I'd start by defining what makes horror at all: horror is fiction in which the primary intent is to frighten or disturb the reader. Good horror, then, is fiction which uses all of the writer's tools—setting, character, plot, language—to invoke that emotional response.

2. 

My best tip on writing effective horror is to read widely in the genre. Know the history, the classics, the best of the modern era; that way you’ll know what works, and what to avoid because it's been done to death.

Gene O'Neill, author of Deathflash

1. 

A read is good across the board, genre or literature, and horror is no different. But an excellent piece, including horror, requires the writer to provide something additional in terms of craft. It's an experience, not just a read.

2. 

I think scary is best implied. The reader is a collaborator, letting his imagination do the work. Seldom graphic description by the writer. The Haunting of H ill House is a great example—only one scary, graphic thing described in the book—a bending door. 

David Wellington, author of The Last Astronaut

1. 

Horror is probably the most subjective of literary effects. What scares me might leave you only mildly perturbed, and vice versa. A good horror story will support a variety of different kinds of fear, from the immediate disgust of gore to the lingering dread of the big, existential cosmic revelation. I will say that in prose, the one thing that almost never works is the jump scare.

2.

If you want to write effective horror, look at what scares you. Write about that. But! Always keep in mind that the point of a horror story is catharsis. You need a monster you can defeat, or at least an encounter your protagonist can survive. Writing about climate change in horror is tricky, because it's hard to imagine a character meaningfully reversing an atmospheric trend. Much better to write a story about someone trapped in a flood, or a suburban soccer mom who has to provide food for her kids in a time of famine. Keep your monster simple, easily described, and ultimately beatable, and you'll have a much easier time tapping into the lived experience of fear.


Paula Guran, editor of The Year's Best Dark Fantasy and Horror

1. 

As far as writing, it takes the same skills that any good fiction takes. Beyond that, good dark fiction makes the reader feel a level of disquietude that can range from the uncomfortable to feeling one is losing control of reality. It must do more than merely shock or disgust.

2. 

Read widely outside of the genre and beyond fiction. Be original. Write. Write some more. 

Jason Sizemore, author and editor-in-chief of Apex Publications

1. 

There's a great moment in the classic cult SF/horror comedy The Rocky Horror Picture Show that I think defines an important element of good horror. Dr. Frank N’ Furter is about to unveil his creation (Rocky) to Brad and Janet. He stops singing and holds the audience in thrall with the line: "I see you shiver with antici . . . [three second pause] . . . pation. Most of the time in horror, the build-up is far more intense than the actual resolution. Just ask Brad and Janet! 

2.

I offer two pieces of wisdom that are applicable most of the time. First, keep your villain off screen for most of the novel. When I think of my favorite horror novels, many of them have memorable villains that loom over the story but make a minimal amount of appearances. Some examples include Silence of the Lambs by Thomas Harris (Hannibal Lecter), The Stand by Stephen King (Randall Flagg), and The Passage by Justin Cronin (Babcock). Second, use torture and gore sparingly, so that when you decide to place your characters in visceral pain, it will be memorable. King Maker: The Knights of Breton Court by Maurice Broaddus is a violent, dark urban fantasy dealing with drug kingpins, gangs, and other nastiness. Despite its rough material, it’s not a bloody book. But . . . there is one torture scene involving razor blades that still turns my stomach. The scene sticks out because it's horrific and the author has used extreme horror sparingly in the novel. Even blood becomes boring when there are gallons of it available! Naturally, there are plenty of exceptions to these suggestions. The Girl Next Door by Jack Ketchum comes to mind. Another is Little Heaven by Nick Cutter. Still, following my two suggestions should help in most situations.



CHAPTER FOUR

HELLO DARKNESS, MY OLD FRIEND

Publishing—big or small, traditional or indie—is first and foremost a creative enterprise. If publishers (or writers) were interested solely in making money, they'd have become doctors or lawyers. But in order to reach readers and continue to put out books, publishing needs to be treated as a business. And in order to sell something, you need to put a label on it. In the 1994 film Repo Man the products in a grocery store all bear generic labels printed in plain blue letters on a white background. Beer. Paper towels. Crispy flakes. Even labels as simple as these serve a purpose. Who would want to go into a grocery where all the food items were simply marked food? Sure, some people might enjoy being surprised by what's in the cans and packages when they get home and open them, but most of us wouldn't. This is why every book or film isn't simply labeled Good Book or Good Movie.
But it's not just readers (or viewers) who have this consumer mentality. Writers do, too, and it shapes what we write. We start out as readers and we're exposed to labels on books and magazines right from the start: the genres, the authors, the titles. They're all labels. And if over time we develop our aesthetic as readers—what sort of stories and narrative techniques we prefer—we create our own labels for fiction: Type of Story I Like and Type of Story I Don't Like. (By the way, never trust a reviewer or critic who confuses “Type of Story I Like” with, “This Is What Makes Good Literature for Everyone on the Entire Planet for All Time.”)
There are pluses and minuses to a label mentality for artists. On the plus side, it gives us a direction to set out in, a discipline to explore. Writing, painting, acting, singing, dancing. And if we dedicate ourselves to one discipline, we can keep working at it until we reach a professional level. And we can further specialize by selecting a specific pathway in an art. Comedy vs. drama, popular music vs. classical. And, of course, having a label helps in marketing yourself and your work. But a label mentality leads us to imitate others, at least at first, instead of developing our own voice from the get-go. We find models we like and do our best to create art that mimics theirs. Look at all the fantasy writers who've imitated Tolkien over the years, or the current crop of grimdark fantasy writers imitating George R.R. Martin, or all the mystery writers who tell stories of quirky genius detectives like Sherlock Holmes or amateur sleuths like Jane Marple. Some of these writers find great success writing variations on other people's work, putting their own unique spin on it and contributing to the genre they're working in. Others remain imitators, their work pale shadows of what's come before. This chapter’s focus is on different types of horror and the special concerns about writing them, as well as their strengths and drawbacks. But before we start talking about labels, I want you to be aware they're a double—edged sword. Actually, a multi-edged sword, if there is such a thing. Advantages and Disadvantages of Labels in Writing Horror. Above all, they give you a place to start. If you enjoy reading gothic horror, you're familiar with its tropes and narrative techniques. This gives you tools to work with, to practice and gain skill using. Here are some other important points about labels:

- They can also keep you from developing your own individual approach to horror—your own themes and narrative style. You're so busy learning to become a label that you never become yourself as an artist.

- Labels are extremely handy marketing tools. They allow you to present your work to agents, editors, and your audience in a way that lets them know what they're getting. This gives you a much greater chance of selling your work because you're treating it as a commodity.

- But by treating your work as a clearly defined product, you can end up producing basically the same type of story over and over, like an endless stream of widgets coming off an assembly line. Over time, this can become deadly dull for both you and your audience. Assuming your audience hasn't gotten bored with your fiction and moved on to read other writers. Remember what I said about the unknown in Chapter Two? When an author debuts, his or her work is unknown to readers. But after that, their work becomes known—especial1y if they continue producing the same type of story over and over—and the work can quickly lose any sense of innovation in subject matter and technique. So before we talk about the different flavors of horror, I want you to consider a few things:

- What are your goals as a writer? If you want to make a living solely from your writing, then you'll need to write work that's focused primarily on being entertaining and which is solidly placed within a particular genre. You still may want to explore different subgenres of horror to see what you like to write, what produces your best work, or what an audience responds most strongly to. Once you've found a niche that works for you, you need to keep working in it, perhaps for your entire career. You'll also need to write novels instead of short stories or novellas. It's difficult enough to make a living writing fiction, but it's virtually impossible to do so by writing shorter-form fiction. And as I said earlier, having a specific label attached to your work will allow you to more effectively brand yourself. (We'll talk more about marketing in a later chapter.)

- If your goals are primarily artistic, then you can say to hell with labels and write whatever you want. You might gravitate more toward one type of horror than the other, but you also might explore different types at different points in your career. If you go this route, make sure you have a day job to support yourself, though. I'm a full-time English professor, so I have the luxury of being able to write whatever I want whenever I want.

- The ultimate goal of an artist—whether you see yourself as a commercial writer, an art-for-art's-sake writer, or some combination of the two—is to become your own label. Stephen King. Anne Rice. Clive Barker. Shirley Jackson. Peter Straub. Caitlin R. Kiernan. Joe R. Lansdale. Neil Gaiman. These are all writers whose names are their labels. They are, in effect, their own genres, and they're the writers others strive to emulate. If you want to have a chance at joining their exalted ranks, you'll need to keep working to hone your individual subject matter and style without worrying about labels. It's an artistic approach, but one focused more on developing the ultimate expression of yourself as a writer as opposed to consciously trying to write a particular kind of horror. The drawback to this approach? Hardly anyone ever reaches the lofty ranks of the bestselling self-labeled writer. But if that's what you want to shoot for, don't let anyone stop you.

- If your goal is more about learning as much regarding the craft of horror writing as you can—if it's about the work and not so much about yourself—then I’d suggest consciously moving back and forth between subgenres during the course of your career, trying it all and learning as much as you can in the process.

- If your goal is just to write horror and you don‘t care what kind, start writing and worry about labeling your work when it comes time to market it.

- If your goal is to have fun then write whatever the hell kind of horror that brings you the most joy even if it isn't a particularly popular subgenre.

One last word of advice before we start cataloging and classifying. It's okay for your focus to shift throughout your career. You can start out writing the most extreme splattery horror fiction on the planet and after a while start writing subtle psychological horror. You can want to make a pile of money originally but then decide feeding your soul by producing artistic work is more important to you. Or you can begin as an artist and shift over to being a completely mercenary show-me-the-money writer. It's your career. You do you, whatever that is, whenever that is. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise. A word of caution. These days everything is about branding. New writers are inundated with messages telling them how vital is it that they brand themselves as soon as possible if they hope to have any chance of success. Take that advice with several tons of salt. I don't want you to think you need to select a type of horror from the following list and specialize in it for the rest of your life to the exclusion of any other type. A list like this is good to get a general feel for the different types of horror that are out there and maybe introduce yourself to some new types to explore. If nothing else, I hope the list gets you thinking about how rich and varied the field of horror is. 

Supernatural Horror. 

This is arguably the type that most people think of when they think of horror (unless they think of slasher films, that is). It has an element of dark magic to it, usually drawn from some aspect of folklore. As I said in Chapter Two, there’s usually only a single element of dark magic that intrudes upon our world, that violates what we believe to be reality. One ghost, one cursed object, one monster, etc. Sure, you can have a nest of vampires or a pack of werewolves plaguing a town, but it's still one type of supernatural infestation. The more types of supernatural entities you put in a story, the harder it is for readers/viewers to suspend their disbelief and the more the story edges toward fantasy. Something to be aware of when writing supernatural horror: if you use well-known tropes like ghosts and witches, you need to find a way to put an original spin on them. (We’ll discuss how to do this in Chapter Six.)

Psychological Horror. 

Psychological horror is when the monstrous distortion occurs in someone’s mental makeup. Probably the most well-known character in this genre is Norman Bates from Psycho. The narrator in Poe's “The Tell-Tale Heart” fits into this category as well. This subgenre can—and often does—overlap with the thriller genre but psychological horror focuses on a greater degree of distortion in a character's psyche, to the point where they become a monster in their thought processes and behavior. Writing psychological horror allows you to put surprising revelations and twists into your story because you can employ unreliable narrators or characters who can be erratic and unpredictable. Gillian Flynn’s Gone Girl is an excellent example of unreliable narrators in a story. If you're writing in this subgenre, be careful to avoid overused tropes such as the misogynist serial killer or the character who believes other people are demons who must be killed. Strive for originality. Keep in mind that in real life, the vast majority of people who suffer from mental illness are not dangerous to others, and you should avoid portraying mental illness in and of itself as always being a monstrous distortion in your fiction. Make it clear that your psychologically disturbed homicidal characters are the exception rather than the rule.

Realistic Horror. 

Realistic horror can overlap psychological horror, but there’s often less of an emphasis on characters’ mental states and more of an emphasis on the actions they perform. The characters may well be psychologically messed up, but their mental states aren’t explored in any depth. The antagonists are portrayed more as predators. They are what they are, and they do what they do. The reasons for their actions may be explained, but they aren’t the focus of the story. The monstrous distortion comes from the awful things they do to other characters and the impact those actions have on those characters. Jarnes Dickey’s novel Deliverance (and its film adaptation) is a good example of this. Jack Ketchum is an absolute master of this form and if you’re interested in writing realistic horror, you need to read and study his work. The greatest advantage of realistic horror is that the audience doesn't have to work too hard to suspend its disbelief, and since the events depicted could happen in real life, the audience can be more frightened because they know what happens in the story could conceivably happen to them. It's possible to reach a larger audience because of this. A drawback of realistic horror is that it is realistic. If an audience is looking to have their imaginations stimulated by unreal story elements, such as supernatural forces, they won't get it from this subgenre.

Quiet Horror. 

Using subtlety and suggestion instead of in-your-face scares, quiet horror is more about evoking chills and shudders than eliciting screams of terror or cries of disgust from readers. Classic ghost stories—like those written by M.R. James—fall into this subgenre. Charles L. Grant is a master of this subgenre of horror, and if you want to write quiet horror, his work is a must- read. The monstrous distortion is hinted at by eerie details: dry autumn leaves moving along a sidewalk, even though the night air is still; a persistent scratching at your bedroom window, but every time you look, nothing is there. This kind of horror relies on a slow accretion of detail which eventually takes its toll on the protagonists, first causing unease, then dread, then ultimately terror. There's a strong focus on the characters’ mental and emotional states in quiet horror, and it can overlap psychological horror in this area, although the sinister, unearthly forces at work might well turn out to be quite real. One of the strengths of quiet horror is that as the story builds tension for the protagonist one detail at a time, it can have the same effect on the audience. Another strength is that since quiet horror doesn’t rely on spilling gallons of blood or showing characters being eviscerated in nauseating detail, readers who dislike graphic elements in horror won't be turned away by your fiction. A drawback is that modern readers might not have the patience for this type of horror. They want stories that move at a faster pace and where the horror looms larger. They don't want to read about soft scratching at a window. They want something to break through the damn window, rush into the house, and attack the occupants. 

Extreme Horror. 

This type of horror gleefully spills blood and guts all over the page. It depicts twisted violence and deviant sex, savagery and cruelty, all of which adds up to extremely monstrous distortion. This kind of horror turns off a lot of readers (as I mentioned above), especially if the extreme content is the story’s sole focus, and because of this, it tends to have a smaller audience than more restrained types of horror. And if the extreme content isn't handled well, it can swiftly descend into unintentional parody. Many beginning writers are attracted to extreme horror because they think it’s transgressive and edgy and that they're real artists who aren't afraid of going to places in their work that more timid artists wouldn’t dare to explore. But if there’s no point to the carnage, no exploration of character, then extreme horror is like a movie that's nothing but special effects from start to finish without any story—ultimately empty and forgettable. Extreme horror is like any other subgenre, in that it can be done well or poorly, but because it's too easy to mistake "extreme" for artistic content in and of itself, writers can fail to develop other aspects of their story. At its absolute worst, extreme horror can become little more than pornography—simplistic, artless material created solely to feed its audience's basest hungers. But at its best, it can be as effective and artistic as any other kind of horror. J.F. Gonzalez’s novel Survivor is an excellent example of this form. Jack Ketchum’s The Girl Next Dour—which I've mentioned before —is perhaps the best example of extreme horror where violence and its effects on everyone—victims as well as perpetrators—are employed to comment on aspects of human nature we'd rather not acknowledge. In film, the original version of Martyrs might be the ultimate expression of artistic extreme horror.
Want to know if your extreme horror story has anything more to offer than graphic violence for its own sake? Imagine that none of the violence is depicted on the page, that each time your deranged killer swings a machete at a victim, the scene ends and the results are left up to the reader's imagination. If you still have a story that could stand on its own merits without detailed depictions of violence and gore, you’re fine. If you don't, it probably means you've written a series of violent scenes that are meaningless. Those of you who aren't into extreme horror or have never read or watched it might be wondering: Why portray violence, injury, and death in detail if a story can exist without it? One of the strengths of extreme horror—and its prime ethos—is that it's honest. If violence and its aftermath are shied away from, glossed over, and sanitized for an audience's comfort, that denies the reality of what violence is. It's like old black-and-white movies from the first half of the twentieth century, where a gangster or Wild West character would get shot or stabbed and immediately fall to the ground, dead, without experiencing any suffering or spilling a single drop of blood. If you’re going to write extreme horror, you need to remember that your characters are human, not simply unfeeling mannequins to be dismantled for fun. This dehumanizing factor—this emotional numbness that can affect both creator and audience—is extreme horror’s biggest potential pitfall.
A huge problem with extreme horror is that there's often a nasty streak of misogyny running through it, whether this is conscious on the part of creators or not. Some people might argue that since women are so often the targets of violence in the real world, that this reality should be reflected in horror fiction. Others might say that by constantly portraying women merely as meat to be sliced and diced in stories, extreme horror dehumanizes women and perpetuates the idea that they exist solely for the entertainment of men. Gratuitous rape scenes in extreme horror typify this misogyny. Some people believe that rape should never be portrayed in fiction. Others think that if you're going to include extreme content in fiction, any type of extreme content is fair game to use. We'll get into a deeper discussion on using violence in horror fiction in later chapters, but for now, I'll simply say that, if you do employ rape as a narrative device in your fiction, ask yourself why are you doing so and what response do you want your readers to have to those scenes? If you have no reason other than you think it's cool to show women being raped, that it’ll be a turn-on for your readers and show the innate superiority of men over women, then you should probably sit down and take a good hard look at yourself and how you view the relationship between genders. And seriously consider getting some therapy. All of this may sound as if I'm dissing extreme horror as a subgenre, but I’m not. Reviewers sometimes classify my horror fiction as extreme. But I am saying that it's too easy to fall into the trap of focusing on the extreme elements to exclusion of all else—prose, character, plot, etc.—and using extreme elements in fiction irresponsibly.

Literary Horror. 

Literary horror—or, as it’s referred to in film, art-house horror—attempts to do the same thing any literary fiction does. It strives to create a stronger, deeper artistic experience. Writers do this by focusing on language and character more than plot (since plot is an artificial and obvious shaping of events that doesn't occur in real life) and by exploring innovative narrative structures and techniques, as well as deeper themes. Peter Straub, Paul Tremblay, Elizabeth Hand, Victor Lavalle, Caitlin R. Kiernan, Brian Evenson, and Kaaron Warren are all wonderful writers of literary horror and well worth checking out. Readers seeking a fun, fast read or a movie where they can check their brains at the door and have fun tend not to go for this kind of horror. The audience can be small (as it is for most literary fiction), but this is the kind of horror that tends to garner critical acclaim and awards, and which stands a chance of breaking out of the horror genre and into that most rarefied of all genres: Literature with a capital L. I think this might be the hardest genre to consciously attempt if you don't already love to read literary fiction, whether it's horror or not. If you see yourself as an artist more than an entertainer, this genre could be right for you.

Cosmic Horror. 

Cosmic horror is sometimes called Lovecraftian horror because it follows—sometimes slavishly—in the footsteps of H.P. Lovecraft. The idea is that there are unimaginably powerful and malign alien entities that are as far beyond us as we are beyond one-celled organisms. These entities are the true rulers of the universe and they can reshape reality to suit their whims, and we are so far beneath their notice, we might as well not exist at all. The core concept—that we are at the mercy of vast forces that we can never hope to understand, let alone combat—is where the monstrous distortion comes from. Anyone can relate to this basic idea. We can't stop or reverse time and its effects, we can't halt the approach of death. And the more we learn about the universe we inhabit, the smaller we feel. Lovecraft is credited as the creator and ultimate exemplar of cosmic horror, but some examples of modern-day non-Lovecraftian cosmic horror are John Langan’s award-winning The Fisherman and Laird Barron's The Croning. The main problem with cosmic horror is when writers imitate Lovecraft poorly or imitate his work for their entire careers, never finding their own voice and subject matter. Ramsey Campbell, Robert Bloch, and Brian Lumley all started out following in Lovecraft’s footsteps before forging their own individual paths in the genre. It's easy to see why it‘s tempting to write Lovecraftian horror. There's a loose mythos of gods, alien races, and creatures to play with—established enough to give writers some structure but vague enough to allow them plenty of room to add their own contributions, And the term Lovecraftian can work well as a branding/marketing tool, And there have been a number of anthologies looking to bring a more modern perspective to Lovecraft’s mythos. She Walks in Shadow presents Lovecraftian stories written by women, and Heroes of Red Hank (in which I have a story) features tales of people who Lovecraft marginalized—or even demonized—during his time. Lovecraft’s racism and misogyny are well-documented, and that's made him a problematic figure in the field for many readers, writers, and publishers. Many of us—myself included—feel it's a mistake to venerate Lovecraft as some sacred high priest of cosmic art. So if you want to work in the genre of cosmic horror, especially if you want to use specific concepts and settings from Lovecraft’s fiction, you’ll need to decide for yourself how to deal with his legacy—both the good parts and bad.
Another drawback to writing Lovecraftian fiction is that Lovecraft‘s creations—Cthulhu, Innsmouth, Miskatonic University, the Necronomicon—are so well known to readers that they've lost any real impact, almost to the point where they've become parody in and of themselves. If you want to write cosmic horror, I advise you to steer clear of overt Lovecraftian elements and trappings, if for no other reason than because, as I've said before, you shouldn't remain an imitator for your entire career. We already have Lovecraft and his fiction. What we don't have is your fiction and the stories only you can tell.

Erotic Horror. 

The name of this subgenre says it all. It's all about horror mixed with sex. But erotic horror is more than simply inserting sex scenes into a horror novel. The sexual elements are intertwined with the horror elements, and the monstrous distortion in this subgenre often comes from the erotic aspects of the story. One of the features of the subgenre is that the sexual elements can be both attractive and repulsive at the same time, and this dichotomy can be disturbing for readers—which makes it perfect for horror. This subgenre can and often does overlap with extreme horror. Sex works well as a story element in horror. Sex is intimate, on both physical and emotional levels. We're vulnerable in a way we aren't in any other aspect of our lives. There’s apprehension, fear of rejection and failure, and there are elements of dominance and submission that come into play. All of these elements are perfect fodder for horror. Some excellent practitioners of this form are Lucy Taylor, John Everson, Charlee Jacob, and Wrath James White. The Hot Blood series of anthologies are also great resources for exploring erotic horror. The plus side of writing erotic horror is easy to see. It's about sex, and sex and sexual identity is an integral part of what it means to be human. And to be purely mercenary about it, sex sells. On the negative side, it can be difficult to write sex scenes well and you might get bored writing them over and over. Erotic and extreme horror can blend well, but erotic horror can have the same drawbacks as extreme: scenes that don’t serve the story and scenes that can descend into misogyny. You also need to be careful not to engage in slut-shaming, homophobia, transphobia, etc. And it can become ridiculous if your characters pause to have sex at inappropriate times in a story. There's a monster chasing us through these woods? Let’: stop in this clearing for o quickie before we resume running for our lives. Another puzzling—at least to me—drawback to erotic horror is that some readers are uncomfortable with sexual content. Like, really uncomfortable. They can read about mutilation and murder without batting an eye, but the moment a character's genitals come into play, they freak out. I'm not sure why this happens. Mixed feelings about sex in general on the part of some readers? Whatever the reason, sexual elements can drive away some readers from your work. But on the plus side, if you want to make readers uncomfortable, want to make them squirm, then erotic horror can be an effective tool.

Body Horror. 

This type of horror can—and often does—overlap other types, especially extreme horror and erotic horror. David Cronenberg‘s films are well known for exploring this type of horror, and The Human Centipede trilogy might be the ultimate expression of body horror in movies. J.G. Bal.lard’s Crash fuses erotic and body horror, and Stephen King's story “Survivor Type" is a great example. Injury, illness, deformity, mutilation, transformation—whether mystical or surgical, chosen or forced—and parasitism are where the monstrous distortion in body horror comes from. Monsters themselves are incarnations of body horror with their unnatural, grotesque appearances, especially if they’re humanoid in any way. Like extreme and erotic horror, body horror elements need to serve a story. It's not enough to simply describe some bizarre mutation of the human form. And you need to be careful not to portray disability in and of itself as a sign of evil. Body horror plugs into some of our most primitive instincts—the fear that bodily distortion could be the result of some threat that might affect us, such as disease or poison. We naturally shun deformities for this reason; it's the animal part of us trying to protect ourselves. Plus, if readers or viewers imagine having the same bodily condition as a character in your story, they can experience a strong visceral reaction. Some readers or viewers are turned off by the gross-out factor in body horror, but others love it. In many ways, I think body horror works best blended with other types, especially if you’re writing a novel.

Surreal Horror. 

Surreal horror is a nightmare made real, where cause and effect aren't clear—or doesn’t exist—and perception of reality, and reality itself, are malleable, uncertain, and untrustworthy. Some excellent examples of surreal horror are the films of David Lynch, the novels of David Wong, and the manga of Junji Ito. Surreal horror has a lot of strengths. Because it's like a nightmare, anyone can relate to it. It conjures the unknown because the symbols used to denote and evoke horror can be very different from traditional ones, such as Frank the Rabbit in Donnie Darko. Because nothing about surreal horror can be easily predicted, the audience can't anticipate what will happen next, increasing their tension because these narratives aren't safe. Anything could potentially happen.
The drawbacks of surreal horror are basically the flip sides of its strengths. If events are too surreal, the audience can't suspend its disbelief. And if too many weird things happen, the audience can't relate to what the characters are experiencing and have trouble identifying with them—especially if the character's perceptions, actions, and reactions are also surreal. My brother isn’t a fan of surreal fiction. As far as he's concerned, if anything can happen, then there aren't any real stakes in a story—especially if events have no lasting reality or impact or can be undone. What the characters experience isn't meaningful for him if by definition it's not real in the world of the story, and in that case, many people can't even pretend the story is real for the duration of a book or film. To deal with these drawbacks, I suggest limiting the number and occurrence of surreal events in your story, spacing them out, and focusing strongly on your characters’ experiences. Making sure the story has a strong emotional core that will impact characters, regardless of how much weirdness they experience, is also important. 

Not the End of the Chapter. 

As far as I'm concerned, the forgoing are the major subgenres of horror. But there are other varieties that might be considered more niche subgenres, or genres that aren’t exactly horror but are horror-adjacent. Here (and in no particular order) is a brief overview of them.

Young Adult Horror. 

I don't necessarily consider this a niche subgenre. Any or all of the previously discussed subgenres of horror can appear in stories written for young adults. The main difference is that the protagonists will be young adults, and the themes and situations of the stories will mirror the concerns and anxieties of this age group. Extreme and erotic content most likely will be toned down to some degree—maybe to a great degree—depending on publishers’ guidelines.

Dark Fantasy. 

Dark fantasy is a fusion of horror and fantasy. The fantasy elements aren't those of traditional medieval fantasy with wizards and warriors, although some people put grimdark fantasy in this category. I think that's more fantasy than horror, though. Dark fantasy is when supernatural, fantastical elements suffuse the story. Neil Gaiman’s work fits into this category, as does Stephen King's Dark Tower series, as well as much of Clive Barker's work.

The Weird. 

I've placed the Weird here instead of listing it as a main horror subgenre because it's a mix of horror, fantasy, science fiction, and just about anything else you want to put into it. It tends to have a literary focus, but it’s increased in popularity in recent years. Read Ann and Jeff Vandermeer’s anthology The Weird to get a good background on this genre. 

Bizarre. 

Bizarro bills itself as the literary equivalent of cult movies. There's a strong overlap with horror, but Bizarro can be humorous and absurd, gross and disgusting, laugh-out-loud funny and deeply disturbing, sometimes all within the space of a few sentences. The best way to get a feel for this genre is to visit Eraserhead Press—which specializes in Bizarro fiction—online and check out their books.

Pulp Horror. 

Pulp horror is adventure and action—oriented horror fiction. I was on a panel once with Brian Keene when he classified his stories as pulp horror. I think Brian's work transcends the label because of the well-developed characters in his stories, but I won't argue with him. Check out his stuff for some great examples of this kind of horror. 

Creature-Feature Horror. 

This is a subset of pulp horror which I sometimes refer to as monsters-chomping-people stories. It can of course be well written and present well-developed characters, but its focus is primarily on giving people a fun read. Severed Press specializes in this kind of fiction.

Transgressive Horror. 

This subgenre is all about breaking taboos. It can—and usually does—overlap with extreme and erotic horror, but its goal is to get readers to question what they consider to be taboo and to shake them up mentally and emotionally, to jolt them out of their mundane patterns of thought and behavior.

Gothic Horror. 

This is a throwback to horror fiction of the nineteenth century, sometimes in terms of the type of story being told—for example, a subtle ghost story—or in terms of setting, such as Susan Hill’s The Woman in Black. Some gothic horror writers seek to emulate the style of nineteenth century writers as well.

Humorous Horror. 

Both humor and horror use the unexpected to elicit a response from their audiences, and because of this, they go beautifully together. A lot of Jeff Strands work falls into the category of humorous horror, and if you want to write humorous horror, he’s the man to check out.

Apocalyptic Horror. 

Stephen Kings The Stand is probably the best-known example of this kind of story. Richard Matheson's classic I Am Legend is another great example. And of course, zombie apocalypse fiction ala Night of the Living Dead and The Walking Dead fits in here. The world has ended, everything‘s gone to hell, and the survivors must deal with dark forces on top of the end of civilization.

Survival Horror. 

This can overlap with apocalyptic horror, but it doesn't have to. Movies like The Grey and the previously mentioned Deliverance are prime examples of this subgenre. What makes survival horror different from a survival story is that there's something about the situation people find themselves in that is dark and nightmarish, and that's where the monstrous distortion comes from.

Folk Horror. 

The Wicker Man, Harvest Home, Midsommar, Children of the Corn, and “The Lottery" are all examples of folk horror. People living in small, isolated settings adhere to the old ways of their ancestors—which usually means sacrificing outsiders to pagan gods that are real or imagined. This subgenre feeds off the uneasiness people living in the modern world have with nature and their disconnection from it.

Science Fiction Horror. 

Black Mirror is an excellent example of this, as are many of Michael Crichton’s novels, So are The Fly, Alien, and of course the one that started it all, Mary Shelly’s Frankenstein. Science creates the monstrous distortion at the heart of these kind of stories.

Country Horror, Small-Town Horror, Urban Horror. 

These are all variations on a theme. The settings are places where the characters are out of their element. They fear the residents view them as outsiders that must be dealt with—permanently. The Wrong Turn series of movies are good examples of country horror, as again is Deliverance and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre. Much of Stephen King's work uses small towns for its horror: Salem's Lot, Derry, Castle Rock . . . And Stranger Things is set in a small Indiana town. The Warriors has a nightmarish element to it that could arguably classify it as an urban horror film, and The Purge: Anarchy is another great example of urban horror.

Social Horror. 

This is horror where the monstrous distortion arises from a dark take on a societal issue and makes a statement about society. Examples: The Stepford Wives, Get Out, Us, Stephen Graham Jones’ excellent novel Mongrels, and many, many episodes of The Twilight Zone in its various incarnations. 

Religious/Satanic Horror. 

Books like Rosemary's Baby and The Exorcist, and movies like The Prophecy (not the one about the mutated bear but the one with Christopher Walken) and The Rite (with Anthony Hopkins), fall into the category of religious/ satanic horror. The monstrous distortion comes from religious concepts (usually Christian and often Catholic) depicting unearthly beings such as angels and demons as threats to us mere mortals. Some people find the concept of satanic evil to be terrifying. These are among my least favorite type of horror stories, though. If Satan exists, so does God, and since God always beats Satan, there's no tension in these stories for me. Their adherence to religious rules makes them too known for my taste. But they’re popular stories with a ready-made mythos for writers to draw on.

Supernatural Thriller. 

This is primarily a thriller which has a supernatural element to it. The movie The Gift is a good example. This is also a label writers and publishers use when they're afraid calling a work horror will limit its audience. 

Dark Crime, Dark Suspense, Dark Mystery. 
