Introduction {

Introduction

So, you want to write a novel? Great! Writing a novel is a worthwhile goal. It’ll challenge you, stretch you, and change you. Getting it published will gain you respect from your family and friends, and it may even earn you a bit of fame and money.
But respect, fame, and money aren’t the only reasons for writing a novel. The only reason you need to give for writing a novel is that you want to write a novel. Don’t let anyone bully you by demanding some better reason; there isn’t one.
Whatever your reason, Writing Fiction For Dummies can help you make the leap from writer to author. You can write a powerful novel. You can get it published. And you can be the author you’ve always wanted to be.

About This Book

Writers like to think of themselves as artists, and rightly so; writing fiction is an art form. But artistic talent is not enough. Writing fiction is also a craft — a set of practical skills you can learn. This book is about teaching you the craft of writing fiction so that your art can shine through. So if you’re a budding novelist, then we wrote this book specifically for you. This book teaches you the craft you need, shows you how to edit yourself, and takes you through the process of getting published.
If you’re more advanced than a beginning writer, that’s great! You’ll find some parts of this book obvious. We hope to surprise you with some fresh insights, though, so stay alert. We’ve found that even published novelists are sometimes weak in certain areas. Our aim is to give you a solid foundation in every aspect of writing fiction.
We focus on novel-writing, but if you’re a screenwriter or you want to write short stories, you’ll find virtually all the material here useful to you; however, we don’t try to cover the specialized things you need to know to write screenplays or short stories. Again, our goal is to give you the foundation that every fiction writer must have in order to write strong stories.
As you build your craft, remember that every rule we mention in this book can be broken. Every rule. If we sometimes sound horribly dogmatic on some of the rules, it’s because they’re almost always true. When we sound less certain with a rule, it’s because it’s true more often than not. The one unbreak-able rule of fiction writing is that no rule is unbreakable — you should use whatever works.

Conventions Used In This Book

We use the following conventions throughout the text to make everything consistent and easy-to-understand:

All Web addresses appear in monofont.

New terms appear in italics and are closely followed by an easy-to-understand definition.

Bold text indicates keywords in bulleted lists or highlights the action parts of numbered steps.

The English-speaking world is still trying to sort out how to deal with generic pronouns. In the bad old days, he was understood to refer to both men and women, which never made sense, but it was the standard. Now there is no standard. Replacing he with they is awkward, so in most cases, we try to use he and she in roughly equal numbers.
Because more fiction readers are women than men, we often tilt toward using she when referring to the reader. Because a great many editors are women, we often use she for editors and he for agents, but we’re not consistent. We try to mix up the he and she usage when referring to characters. Forgive us if we don’t get our pronouns quite even. We tried, and anyway we know you’re smart enough not to be confused.

What You’re Not to Read

We’ve written this book so you can easily find information and readily understand what you find. We also simplify the presentation so you can identify “skippable” material. Sidebars are the shaded boxes that appear here and there. They share useful facts, but they aren’t essential for you to read.

Foolish Assumptions

Every author writes with an ideal reader in mind. Here are some things we assume about you:

You want to get published. You’re a creative person, but you intend to act like a professional right from the start. You’re willing to do unglamorous tasks, like researching your category and target audience, because you know that fiction writing is a business, not just an art.

You want to write a novel. This book focuses on writing novels, which typically run 60,000 words or more. If you prefer to write short fiction, the information on craft applies, but you’ll create a simpler plot and use fewer characters. If you want to write a screenplay, you’ll find all the informa-tion on story world, characters, structure, plot, and theme valuable, but we don’t discuss the formatting you need to know for screenwriting, and we don’t tell you how to sell your screenplay (you can find that kind of info in Screenwriting For Dummies, by Laura Schellhardt [Wiley]).

You recognize that fiction is a big tent with many different opinions on what’s good and what isn’t. In this book, we give you broad guide-lines that apply to most kinds of fiction, but there are no rules that apply everywhere and always for all writers. You’ll strongly disagree with us sometimes, but you’re smart enough to take the advice that works for you and ignore the rest. You know that many other writers will find the advice you reject useful.

You want to figure out how to tell a great story rather than how to fix grammar and punctuation. You already have a good handle on grammar, or you know where to find the help you need (perhaps you plan to enlist your grammar-guru friends, consult Geraldine Woods’s English Grammar For Dummies [Wiley], or hire a freelance proofreader). When you do break grammar rules, you claim artistic license and do it on  purpose.

How This Book Is Organized

This book is divided into five parts. Dive in wherever you like. This section describes what’s in this book and where we put it.

Part I: Getting Ready to Write Fiction

A little planning can go a long way. We believe strongly in strategic thinking — setting goals, defining story, choosing a category, developing a creative style, researching your novel, and getting the right tools. If you need help in strategic planning for your next novel, check out this part and see whether you can find some ideas you’ve never seen anywhere else.

Part II: Creating Compelling Fiction

Writing fiction is about giving your reader a powerful emotional experience. To do this, you need to master several main aspects of fiction, including creating a great story world, constructing believable characters, building a well-structured plot, and overlaying it all with a theme. These are your core skills, and this part gives you step-by-step guides for developing them. After you’ve mastered this part, you’ll have all the tools you need to write the first draft of your novel.

Part III: Editing and Polishing Your Story and Characters

After you have a first draft, you need to edit it to a high polish. Editing isn’t hard, but you need a strategic and tactical plan to help you analyze your characters and your plot. This part shows you how to ask the right questions of your manuscript and how to use your answers to rework your story. We give you many practical tips for editing your manuscript from top to bottom.

Part IV: Getting Published

With an excellent manuscript in hand, you’re ready to take it out to the world and knock ’em dead with your story. You’ll want to get a second opinion, of course, but after you’ve been through that, you’re ready to find out about editors and agents. Don’t be terrified of these folks — they’re looking for writers (like you) with great stories. If you have what they need, they’ll become your instant lifelong friends.
This part shows you how to research and identify the agents or editors who are most interested in your kind of fiction. You discover how to pitch your work to agents and editors who are looking for exactly what you have.

Part V: The Part of Tens

This part contains some quick resources on two subjects of undying interest: Ten steps to designing your story and ten reasons people in the publishing business reject novels.

Where to Go from Here

The great thing about this book is that you decide where to start and what to read. It’s a reference you can jump into and out of at will. Just wander over to the table of contents or the index to find the information you want. If you’re new to writing fiction, you may want to start at the beginning of this book and read through to the end. If you’re more experienced, then you can find a topic that interests you and turn right to it. If you’re interested in character development, check out Chapter 7. If you’ve already written a story and want to analyze the plot, flip to Chapter 13. And if you want advice on finding an agent, try Chapter 17. Whatever the case, you’ll find a wealth of information and practical advice. Ready? Set. Go!

}

--Part I: Getting Ready to Write Fiction
Chapter 1: Fiction Writing Basics {

Part I

Getting Ready to Write Fiction

In this part . . . We know you’re excited to start writing, but before you begin, you need to do some strategic thinking. In this part, we consider exactly what makes a great story and how to find the fiction category that works best for you and your reading audience. Next, we take a look at four common methods writers use to write a novel. Finally, we delve deeply into the important subject of managing your time — and yourself.

Chapter 1

Fiction Writing Basics

In This Chapter

Setting your sights on publication

Getting your head ready to write

Writing great fiction and editing your story

So you want to write a novel? Great! But is that all you want to do? After all, anybody can type a bunch of words and call it a novel. The trick is writing one that’s good enough to get published. This book is for fiction writers who want to write an excellent novel and get it published. That’s a tough, demanding goal, but it’s entirely doable if you tackle it intelligently.If you’re going to write a novel, you need to get your head fully into the game. That means making a game plan that’s a proven winner and then executing your game plan. After you have a plan, you need writing (and rewriting) skills — lots of them. Writing fiction means developing a raft of technical skills, both strategic and tactical. None of these steps are hard, but they’re a lot easier to pick up when you have some guidance.
After you’ve written a great novel, whether you choose to get an agent or make the deal yourself, selling a strong story is about making the right connections with the right people at the right time.
Our goal in this book is to take you from being a writer to being an author. We have every confidence that you can do it, and this chapter explains how. It can happen — and it will happen — if you have the talent and persistence to do what you need to do.

Setting Your Ultimate Goal As a Writer

If you’re writing a novel, don’t be modest about your goals. First of all, you want to write a really good novel, right? You aren’t in this game to write a piece of schlock. You have some talent, and you have a story, and you want to write it well.
Second, you want to get the darned thing published. Don’t hang your head and say, “I’ll be happy just to get it written.” Write to get published. Humility is a fine thing, but false humility can keep you from doing the one thing you really want to do.
 
Do this right now:

1.  Take a piece of paper and write down these words:

   “I’m going to write a novel and get it published. I’m going to do it because writing a novel is worthwhile and because I have the talent to do it. I’m going to do it because I have something important to say to the world. I refuse to let anything get in my way.”

2.  Put today’s date at the top and your signature at the bottom.

    Hang it where you can see it every day, and tell your family and friends about it.

As of this moment, you’re a writer. Don’t be ashamed to say so. On the happy day when you get your novel published, you’ll be an author.
 
It’s all too common for a writer to say (hanging head in shame), “I’m an unpublished writer.” Banish that word unpublished from your vocabulary. You are a writer. Call yourself a writer, whether you’ve been published or not.

Pinpointing Where You Are As a Writer

Now that you’ve set your goal — to write a novel good enough to get published — we can talk strategically about how to get there. It won’t be easy, but it will be straightforward, so long as you do things in the right order.We’ve identified four stages in the life of most writers on the road to publication. They’re analogous to the four years of college, so we like to call these stages freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior.
Please note that these stages may take more or less than a year to work through. We’ve seen a writer go from sophomore to senior in less than a year. Randy is pretty sure he was stuck as a junior for about eight years. If he’d had a coach, he could’ve zipped through that painful junior stage in about a year. That’s why he takes such joy in coaching writers.

This section looks at those four stages and explains how you can advance to the next level.

Freshmen: Concentrating on craft

Freshman writers are new to the game, and that’s okay. Every Ph.D. was a freshman in college at one time, and every author was a freshman writer at one time. It’s one step along the path. Typically, freshman writers have been reading fiction all their lives, and at last they’ve decided to start writing a novel. They write a few chapters and then discover an unpleasant truth: This fiction-writing game is harder than it looks.
Some freshmen give up at that point, but those who persist decide to get some training in the craft of writing fiction. They read books, take courses, join critique groups, and maybe go to a writing conference. Most importantly, they keep writing.
 
Nobody ever got good at writing by talking about it. Or hearing about it. Or reading about it. You get good at writing by doing it. Then you get your work critiqued, figure out what’s not up to par, and try it again. And again. And again.

At first, freshmen writers feel like nothing is happening — those miserable critique partners never seem to be satisfied, and new flaws seem to pop up before they solve the old ones. But persistence pays off. Eventually, after months of hard work, freshmen writers wake up one day to a surprising truth: They’ve gotten better. They’ve gotten a whole lot better.
 
A freshman advances by writing and by getting it critiqued and by studying the craft of fiction and by writing some more.

Sophomores: Tackling the proposal

Sophomore writers have been writing for a good while, and they’re no longer rank newbies. The other writers in their critique group are telling them, “That’s pretty good. You’ve made a lot of progress.”
A sophomore has generally taken at least one course on writing or has read several books on writing. A sophomore has almost always gone to at least one writing conference. He or she is starting to feel pretty confident. This writing game no longer seems hopeless. The craft of fiction is no longer a mystery.
But one thing is still an enigma: By now, a sophomore has heard how hard it is to break into publishing. There’s a thing called a book proposal that needs to get written, but who knows what that’s supposed to look like? And it requires a dreaded synopsis, and that sounds too ghastly for words. And how are these things related to a query letter? Typically, a sophomore feels a mix of confidence and terror: A growing confidence in craft, a rising terror of marketing. (If you’re curious about query letters, synopses, and proposals, see Chapter 16.)
Retreating into defeatism here is easy, but that way lie dragons. The winning strategy is to keep writing — advancing in craft — but now to begin figuring out how to market yourself effectively. Writing marketing materials like a query, a synopsis, and a proposal is a skill that no novelist can afford to ignore.
 
If you’re a sophomore, it’s high time to go to a good writing conference armed with a proposal (and a finished chapter or two) and show it to somebody — maybe a writer. Maybe an agent. Maybe an editor. The proposal will likely need a lot of work. Go with that attitude and ask for a critique of your proposal. Make it clear that you’re not pitching the project yet; you’re just learning how to pitch. You’ll get all the critique you can handle. (If you’re uncertain about the difference between an agent, an editor, and a publisher, see Chapter 17.)

Go home and rework that proposal. And then do it again. And again. Sooner or later, you’ll find that by some magic, you have a terrific proposal to go along with your excellent writing. You’ll be a junior.
 
A sophomore advances by writing, by studying how to write a proposal, by writing that first practice proposal, and then by testing the proposal at writing conferences.

Juniors: Perfecting their pitches

Juniors are excellent writers. They’ve mastered most of the skills they need to get published. Their critique partners are saying, “Why aren’t you published yet?”
A junior has typically taken a proposal or a sample chapter to a conference, showed it to an editor or an agent, and heard the magic words, “Send that to me.” The junior has also heard back a few months later with the news, “Your work isn’t right for me.”

The junior year can be frustrating, humiliating, and depressing. It can be exhilarating beyond words at the same time. The junior period carries great highs and great lows, but you get through it if you persist.If you’re a junior, then you need to be writing, writing, writing — perfecting your craft. You also need to be polishing proposals and pitching them, preferably in person at writing conferences.
It’s quite possible that you’ll find an agent late in your junior year. Or you may hear from an editor that your book is under review by the publishing committee. Or a published author may read some of your work and tell you that you’re almost there. If any of these things happen, you can be quite confident that you’ve become a senior.
 
A junior advances by striving for perfection in craft, by polishing proposals, and by pitching projects to live agents or editors.

Seniors: Preparing to become authors

Seniors are those chosen few who are destined to get published. This is clear to everyone — their critique buddies, their family, their friends, their agent. But it doesn’t always feel that way to the senior.Your senior period can be supreme agony. You are that close to getting published. You know in your gut that you write better than many published authors. In a just universe, you ought to be published. So why aren’t you?The answer is that you just haven’t found the right publisher with the right project at the right time. Making that connection takes time: the time you spend as a senior. Any senior could be published at any time.
Your action plan as a senior is simply to follow the process. By this time, you must have a very polished complete manuscript and a strong proposal. Get your work out to editors (or better yet, have your agent get your work out). Keep getting it out, ignoring the rejections. It only takes one yes to get published. Keep looking for that yes.
And keep writing. You may one day wake up with a brilliant idea for a novel. You know instantly that this is The One — this novel will be your ticket. If this happens, follow your instinct. Write that novel in a white fury. You now have all the skills to write an excellent novel, and you’ll find that you can write it far more easily than you can revise that old worn-out thing you started as a freshman writer.

Someday — this usually happens on a miserable day when the car’s had a flat tire, or when the washing machine has leaked soapy water all over the floor, or your 3-year-old son has decided to iron the cat — on a day like that, the phone rings. It’s your agent, calling to tell you that a publisher has made an offer on your novel. On that day, you suddenly forget all those years of striving, rejection, and heartache. On that day, you’re an author.
 
A senior advances by ignoring rejections and continuing to submit a polished project until a publisher buys it.

Getting Yourself Organized

Most writers hate organization. We do, too. We probably hate it twice as much as you do, because there are two of us. However, we’ve found that we’re a whale of a lot more productive when we do a bit of organization first. It isn’t fun, but it makes the fun stuff easier.
It helps to know exactly what that fun stuff is, so in this book we begin (in Chapter 2) with a high-level look at why fiction is fun and why your reader wants to read your novel. What keeps your reader turning pages at 3 a.m. when the alarm is set for 6? We show you that secret and what you need to do to keep that reader up all night.
In Chapter 3, we discuss your niche and your genre. You can’t appeal to every reader ever born. But the good news is this: Neither can any other author. Some readers walking this planet may find you the best author they’ve ever read. You need to figure out what those readers look like and how you can best meet their needs. When you know that, you’re ready to write the perfect book for them.
 
You’re unique. That means that you’ll probably use methods different from your friends’ for getting the first draft of your story down on the page. Some authors (Peter, for example) love outlines. Most authors hate them. Our job is not to tell you the one best process to write your novel. Our job is to show you (and we do so in Chapter 4) a variety of roads to completion and to let you choose one that works for you — or better yet, to find a unique road that fits you perfectly.
You have only a few resources that you can use to write your novel: time, energy, and money. Manage those effectively, and writing fiction will be a joy. Fail to manage them well, and writing will be a grind. In Chapter 5, we share some ideas we’ve found helpful.

Mastering Characterization, Plotting, and Other Skills

Novice writers have great ideas. Great writers have great ideas and great craft. Your first task is to understand the craft you need to turn your great ideas into great stories. Here’s what you need:

  ✓  Story world: Your novel doesn’t happen in a vacuum. It’s set somewhere. That somewhere is usually called the setting or milieu, but we prefer the term story world because it’s the world in which your story takes place.
   In Chapter 6, we show you what goes into constructing a great story world. It’s harder than it looks, but we give you a checklist of key concepts you need to nail down to have a fully defined story world. We also show you the most common backdrops that make a story world cry out for a story to fill it up with meaning.

  ✓  Characters: Your characters have a past, a present, and a future, and you need to know each of these. In Chapter 7, we show the ideas that go into building a believable backstory for each character. And we show why backstory is essential for knowing the possible futures of your characters. Finally, we show you how the past and the future intersect in the present — right now — to create a compelling story that moves (and moves your reader).

  ✓  Plot: The typical modern novel has a plot that contains six layers of structure, ranging from the 100,000-foot view all the way down to the up-close-and-personal view. As a novelist, you need to master each of these six layers and put them together into a harmonious story. In Chapters 8 through 10, we coach you through each level.

  ✓  Theme: Every novel has a core idea — a theme. The twin hazards of theme are to put in either too little or too much. Go to Chapter 11 to see how to find your theme by listening to your characters. We also show you what to do to fix the most common problems.

Editing Your Fiction
 
Great writing never happens in the first draft. It happens when you edit your work — keeping what works, chucking what doesn’t, and polishing it all till it gleams.
You can’t depend on your editor to fix your novel. Modern editors are vastly overworked and underpaid. When you hand them your masterpiece, it needs to be burnished to a brilliant shine already.Editing your fiction is hard work, but it’s not a hard idea. It comes down to two primary tasks:

  ✓  Reworking your characters so that they come fully alive

  ✓  Revising your storyline at all six layers of plot

In Part III of this book, we tell you what you need to do and show you how to do it. In Chapter 12, you find out about character bibles, backstory, values, ambitions, story goals, and most importantly, the subtleties of point of view (POV). And in Chapter 13, we show you how to create a hook for your story that will be the number one sales tool at every link in the seven-point sales chain that comes between you and your masses of readers. We teach you Aristotle’s three-act structure, but we add to it a three-disaster structure that Aristotle never dreamed about.
Your scenes are critical to making your story work, so in Chapter 14, you find out how to triage a scene — when to kill a scene, when to leave it alone, and how to fix it when it needs fixing. In Chapter 15, we show you how to analyze your story paragraph by paragraph to put your reader right inside the skin of your characters.

MARGINALIA:

Five urban legends that can hurt you

As soon as you admit to your family and friends that you’re working on a novel, they’ll start feeding you all kinds of urban legends about writing. These are things that “everybody knows,” and yet they’re dead wrong. Wrong or not, they can kill your career before it gets rolling. Here are some of the urban legends we’ve heard, along with answers you should have ready:

 ✓  Legend 1: You’re not smart enough to write a novel. How smart do you have to be to write a novel? How do you know? What does  IQ  have  to  do  with  writing  fiction? The fact is that the main thing any novelist needs is the ability to tap into her own emotional wellsprings and create a story that can move her readers. We know plenty of novelists, and they run the gamut on intelli-gence from average to ultra-high. But every one of them is a person we’d be happy to be stranded with on a desert island for long periods of time. Fiction writers are exceptionally honest people who don’t balk at telling their own inner truths. If you can do that, you can write fiction.

 ✓  Legend 2: You’re not talented enough to write a novel. What is talent? Does anybody know how to measure talent? What if talent is something you grow, not something you inherit? The fact is that writing fiction requires quite a few skills. We’ve never met anyone who had all those skills when they started writing. Every single published novelist we know spent long hours learning the craft of fiction. They all had one thing in common: persistence. We have no idea what talent may be, but we do know persistence when we see it. If you have persistence, you have as good of a chance of getting published as anyone else.

 ✓  Legend 3: You have nothing to write about. Is there only one kind of novel that you can write? Do all novelists have to come from New York City? Do they all have to be trendy and cool? Why? If you’ve lived long enough to be able to type, you have something to write about. If you’ve ever known fear, joy, rejection, love, rage, pleasure, pain, feast, or famine, then you have plenty to write about. If you’ve survived a miserable childhood or a wretched middle school or a toxic relationship — if you’ve been to hell and back — then you have enough material to write about for your whole career. If your life has been one long  happy  stream  of  nicey  nirvana  from beginning to end, then you’ll need to work a little harder, but you should still be able to scrape a story out of that.

 ✓  Legend 4: You have to know people to get a novel published. Who knew Stephen King before he got published? Who knew Tom Clancy? Who knew J. K. Rowling? If you have great writing in your pocket, you’ll get to know people quick enough. All you have to do is show around what you have, and the right people will find you. Yes, really. Great  writing  trumps  great  connections every time.

 ✓  Legend 5: You’ll forget your friends when you’re famous. Which famous writers ever forgot their real friends when they hit the limelight? Why would they do that? If you become famous, you’ll be besieged with people posing as friends who are looking for  a  piece  of  your  fame.  Soon  enough, you’ll find out that the friends who knew-you-when  are  the  only  friends  that  you know for sure love you for yourself. You won’t forget your real friends — you’ll value them more than ever.

Randy’s path to publication

Back in 1988, Randy decided that he was going to write a novel and get it published someday. Never mind why — just because. He started writing that novel, and about a year later, he’d written enough that he felt ready to go to a writing conference. He met some other writers there, got some great training, and joined a critique group.
Another year passed, and Randy’s skills were developing. At a certain point, he realized that the novel he’d been working on for more than two years was fatally flawed. He put it in the drawer and never looked  at it  again, but he didn’t abandon the vision. The goal was not to get that novel published; the goal was to get some novel published. Randy kept writing, worked hard, and after a couple of more years, he finished a novel.
He then began looking for an agent. Meanwhile, he began writing the next book. Within a year or so, he met an agent at a writing conference and within a few months signed an agreement for literary representation with him. The agent submitted the manuscript to a number of likely publishers. Randy kept writing.
One by one, every publisher on the list rejected Randy’s manuscript. The agent submitted it to more  publishers  and  resubmitted  it  to  some publishers who’d rejected it but seemed interested. One of the publishing houses eventually rejected it three times. Randy kept writing.The last publisher on the list saw some merit in Randy’s work. The publishing committee looked at the manuscript for several months — and then rejected it. However, they took the time to point out three major problems that prevented them from  buying  the  work.  Randy’s  agent  called him with the news that the novel was dead. He also explained to Randy the publisher’s three concerns.
That day, Randy began working on a new novel, one that didn’t have any of those problems. This time, he felt sure, he had a winner. This one would be the novel that got published. His agent liked the idea and told him to pursue it. Randy kept writing.
Three months later, the agent died. Randy was devastated. He’d now been writing for eight years. He’d completed a novel, done his best to sell it, had it rejected everywhere, and then lost his champion. He kept writing.
Shortly thereafter, Randy went to a writing conference and made an appointment to talk with an editor he’d never met before. He stumbled through his pitch, making a perfect hash of it. Finally, the editor asked to see a writing sample. Randy pushed five pages across the table, and the editor skimmed over them. “You write pretty well,” he said. “Here’s my card. Send me a proposal and 100 pages.”
A year and a half later, without an agent, Randy sold that novel to that editor’s publishing house. The novel appeared in the spring of 2000, 12 years after he started writing. At last, he was an author. That novel, Transgression, went on to win a Christy Award, and Randy went on to write several more award-winning novels. He became well-known enough that conferences began asking him to teach.
Fast-forward  another  nine  years.  Randy  has taught hundreds of writers. He’s mentored a number of them to become authors. He’s seen his students hit the bestseller list. And he’s now seeing them as finalists for major awards. In this book, he’s distilling what he’s learned over the last 21 years on the art and craft of writing fiction.

Can’t wait! Practicing your proposal

Does a novel need a nice, long proposal to be sold to a publisher, or is a short synopsis good enough?  Most  writers  Randy  knows  always prepare and submit full proposals, even to publishers that they’ve worked with frequently. The agents Randy knows all insist on receiving a proposal before agreeing to represent an author, and most of them use proposals in submitting potential novels to publishers. One editor says that she loves proposals because they help her get ready to take a project to her committee.Randy insists that figuring out how to write a proposal is a highly valuable exercise for any writer.  Many writers of  commercial  fiction need them, and this is becoming even more true as publishers find the economic screws tightening — they need to know that the project has a good chance to sell well.
Please note that the fiction proposal is substantially different from the nonfiction proposal. A query letter is often part of the process (all of which we explain in Chapter 16). However, proposals are very important for a great many novelists, and it’s unwise to remove them from the table. If you meet an agent and he’s interested in your work after reading your query, he’ll ask for more — either a manuscript or a proposal with sample chapters. It’s far too late at that point to suddenly realize you have to learn to write a proposal. Even agents who don’t want a proposal will be asking all the same questions that a proposal answers.


}
Chapter 2: What Makes a Great Story? {

Chapter 2

What Makes a Great Story?

In This Chapter

Satisfying your goals and those of your readers

Writing about change

Understanding the five pillars of fiction

Using the seven core tools of the fiction writer

Your readers desperately want one thing from you when they pick up your novel: a powerful emotional experience. Readers want to feel something, and they want to feel it deeply and fully. If you fail to deliver that emotional punch, you lose, no matter how clever your story or charming your characters.
But assuming you deliver what readers want, you also have the freedom to give them more — possibly much more. It’s up to you to decide what else you want to give, if anything.
The art of writing fiction is built around five key tasks, which we like to call the five pillars of fiction. You must construct a believable setting, fill it with interesting characters, create a strong plot, develop a meaningful theme, and do it all with style. Most writers excel at only one or two of these, but you must become reasonably competent at all of them before you’re likely to get your novel published. You also have seven tactical tools to use in your writing: action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, description, flashback, and narrative summary. When you use these effectively, you give your readers that all-important powerful emotional experience.

Choosing What to Give Your Readers

Why do you write? We’ve asked many writers over the years what drives them to write fiction. We’ve heard zillions of different answers. Here are six of them:

  ✓ To see my name on a book cover

  ✓ To be a famous author

  ✓ To make lots of money

  ✓ To educate people

  ✓ To entertain my readers

  ✓ To persuade people to accept my views on politics or religion

These are all fine reasons to write a novel. Your reasons for writing are your reasons for writing. You don’t have to justify them to anybody. But it’s important to know what they are. Otherwise, how will you know whether you’re succeeding?
 
Take a few minutes right now and write down why you want to write fiction. What do you hope to get out of it? What do you want to do for your readers? On the same sheet of paper, write down the reasons you read. Circle the one that’s most important to you. If you’re like most readers, the main reason you read is to have fun — to be entertained.

In this section, we discuss how novels can educate, persuade, and, above all, entertain readers.

Creating a powerful emotional experience: What your readers desperately want

What is entertainment? After writing and teaching fiction for many years, we’re convinced that entertainment can be boiled down to one thing: giving the reader a powerful emotional experience. Here we unpack this concept a little:

  ✓ Why emotions matter: Emotion is common to all fiction. Think about any of the major genres of fiction, and you see that each of them packs some sort of emotive punch:

 •Romance novels and erotica deliver some combination of love and lust, as does any novel with a romantic thread.

• Suspense novels, thrillers, action-adventure novels, and horror fiction all deliver various flavors of fear.

•Mysteries arouse a strong sense of curiosity and usually deliver a healthy dose of fear.

•Historical novels, fantasy, and science fiction all give the reader an experience of being “elsewhere.”

•General fiction and literary fiction can deliver any of the preceding emotions, along with a strong sense of feeling understood.

 ✓ Why emotions must be powerful: Think about that for five seconds. Do you know anyone who ever bought a novel in the hopes that it would deliver an insipid emotional experience? Of course not! Powerful emotions make stories more enjoyable and memorable. Most people want excitement when they read a novel. They want a lot of excitement. Boatloads of it. If your readers want it, that’s all the reason you need for giving it.

  ✓ Why the experience is critical: Your readers don’t want to read about somebody else having powerful emotions. That’s actually rather dull. Imagine spending hours of your life watching somebody you don’t know crying or shivering in terror or kissing somebody you’ve never heard of. That’s boring.
 
Your readers want to become somebody else for a few hours, to live an exciting life, to find true love, to face down unimaginable terrors, to solve impossible puzzles, to feel a lightning jolt of adrenaline. Give them that, and you’ll earn fans for life. Give your readers anything else, and you’ll lose them forever.
The rest of this book has one goal only: to teach you — as simply and as quickly as possible — how to give your reader a powerful emotional experience. Nothing matters more.

Educating your reader

Some novels educate readers, allowing them to explore other cultures, speculate on scientific discoveries, build up their stores of trivia, or just understand a bit more about how the system (or the world) works. English professors would add that great fiction explores what it means to be human, but don’t feel pressured to explain the meaning of life — plenty of readers just want a little mental exercise.

Virtually all historical fiction has some educational value if the author has done his research well. James Michener is famous for fact-packed novels that let his readers painlessly discover vast amounts of historical information. Jean Auel’s Clan of the Cave Bear series comes loaded with lore about life in Ice Age Europe. Likewise, many science fiction novels teach all sorts of things about science and engineering. If you really want to know about Mars, one easy way to find out about it is to read Kim Stanley Robinson’s brilliant series Red Mars, Green Mars, and Blue Mars.
Readers who love military suspense and technothrillers enjoy finding out about the latest military hardware and technology. Those who read Amish novels are intrigued by the Amish subculture. Fans of legal thrillers enjoy learning about the law. Police procedural buffs thrive on understanding how cops think. Educating your readers is perfectly fine, as long as you’re writing the kind of book where readers expect to learn something.
 
Don’t bore your reader. If you want to work in some information that you find fascinating, make sure it’s also fascinating to your reader. You do that by making it essential to the story. If your characters can’t survive unless they know the details of quark theory, then your reader will want all the quantum details. Remember, though, that you’re not writing a research paper.

Practicing the gentle art of persuasion. 

Many writers don’t merely want to teach their readers; they want to persuade them of something — often an economic or political or religious or ethical opinion. Many novels carry a strong message of some kind. For example

  ✓ Ayn Rand’s novels, such as Atlas Shrugged and The Fountainhead, make her case that a strong and unchecked capitalism is the finest economic system.

  ✓ Tom Clancy’s early military technothrillers show his conviction that the Soviet system was corrupt and would soon collapse under the weight of its own incompetence.

  ✓ The Left Behind series by Jerry Jenkins and Tim LaHaye presents a detailed and adrenaline-laced roadmap for the authors’ beliefs about Biblical end-times prophecy.

  ✓ Michael Crichton’s novel Next explores the ethics of unchecked genetic manipulation in modern biotechnology.

Each of these authors found many readers who agreed strongly with their messages. Each of them has been criticized for preaching their messages too fervently. Yet each of them succeeded in persuading numbers of “nonbelievers” to change their minds.
A novel can persuade some readers if it’s also entertaining, but it’s most likely to find its main audience among those who already believe and who enjoy having their beliefs reinforced. Nobody ever bought a novel because they wanted to change their economic theories, switch political parties, or convert to a new religion. Nobody.
 
Respect your readers by first meeting their need for a powerful emotional experience. You can never persuade readers unless you first entertain them.Decide what your goals are for your fiction. Besides entertaining your reader, what else do you want to achieve? Does your mission include educating readers? Persuading them? Something else? Will these goals undercut the reader’s powerful emotional experience?

Making Life Hard on Your Characters: Conflict Plus Change Equals Story

A story consists of characters in conflict. Your characters want some sort of change in their lives, a change that (for most of the novel) they can’t have. The change may be

  ✓ A change in the relationships of the characters

  ✓ A change within a single character

  ✓ A change in the story world (setting)

In The Lord of the Rings, for example, Frodo the hobbit sets out on a quest to destroy the Ring of Power. If he succeeds, Middle Earth will be radically changed — forever freed from the dark lord Sauron. If he fails, Middle Earth will also be radically changed — forever under Sauron’s vicious boot. The stakes are extraordinarily high. Change is coming, one way or another. It’s up to Frodo to change things for the better.
Always, always, always make your characters want something to change in their lives. The desire for change is what makes your reader invest emotionally in your story. Readers would love to change their own lives, so they respect anyone willing to risk making a change. But you can’t make things easy on your characters. The minute they try to change things, conflict sets in. That’s bad for the characters, but it’s good for your story. The more conflict your characters face, the more emotion your reader invests into them. Your story is an account of how your characters deal with conflict in pursuing change.
If your lead characters get the change they want by the end of the story, that’s usually a happy ending. If they don’t get the change they want by the end of the story, that’s usually an unhappy ending. (We say usually because in either case, your characters may realize at the end of the story that they didn’t really want what they thought they wanted. But that, too, is a change — a change in mental attitude.)
 
What makes a great story great? That’s a complex question, but part of a story’s greatness comes from the depth of the change your character is pursuing. The power of Frodo’s story comes from the high stakes. If he wins, all the free races win; if he loses, so do they. The higher the stakes of the change, the more powerful your story.

The Five Pillars of Fiction

Fiction has five main elements, each of which helps you create a powerful emotional experience for your readers:

  ✓ Story world (often called setting or milieu)

  ✓ Characters

  ✓ Plot (which includes structure)

  ✓ Theme

  ✓ Style

We use each of these pillars of fiction as technical terms throughout this book. You use each of these story aspects in different ways to move your readers. In this section, we look at each pillar in turn to see the meaning it carries.

Setting the stage: Your story world

We prefer the term story world to other common terms, such as setting or milieu. These other words are excellent words, but we want a term that captures the vastness of the stage for your novel. Your story world is all of the following and more:

  ✓ The universe or world where the story takes place

  ✓ The geography, including national boundaries

  ✓ The races of people, other intelligent beings, plants, and animals

  ✓ The historical context

  ✓ Political, economic, religious, and social structures

  ✓ Foods, drinks, and drugs

  ✓ Languages, entertainment methods, and sexual rules and roles

  Some genres require enormously complex story worlds; others simply assume the story world of the reader. In either case, the author should know the story world inside out, because it determines what kind of story is possible. In this respect, story world sets constraints on what kind of powerful emotional experiences you can give your reader. A great story world greatly increases your chances of writing a great story.

Here are some examples of story worlds:

  ✓ The Lord of the Rings, by J. R. R. Tolkien, has Middle Earth as its story world. You could argue that Middle Earth is Tolkien’s finest creation.

  ✓ River God, by Wilbur Smith, takes place in 18th-century B.C.E. Egypt. Smith appears to have taken a lot of liberties with the actual history, but no matter. His story world is complete and dazzling.

  ✓ The Chosen, by Chaim Potok, is set in Brooklyn in the 1940s in a Hasidic Jewish neighborhood. Potok’s story world is close in space and time to modern America and yet worlds apart culturally.

  ✓ The Harry Potter series, by J. K. Rowling, is set in modern England but with one important change — some humans are genetically capable of magic. This single change enables Rowling to paint an epic battle between good and evil.

  ✓ The Da Vinci Code, by Dan Brown, is set in modern Europe and features numerous tourist attractions, including the Louvre and Westminster Abbey. Brown overlays on this an alleged secret society, the Priory of Sion, and he weaves its tentacles back through centuries of Western  civilization, reinterpreting a number of famous historical figures.

Creating characters

Characters are the players on the stage of your story. Each character comes into the story with a long and detailed past (known as a backstory). And each character is driven in some direction — he or she has abstract ambitions and concrete goals.
 
You can’t have conflict until you have characters. More importantly, your reader can’t have a powerful emotional experience without at least one character. That powerful emotional experience comes when you weave such a convincing account of a character that your reader actually becomes that character. Your characters exist so that your reader can get inside the skin of one of them and do battle with the others.

Check out some examples of characters and their essential conflicts:

  ✓ Lizzie Bennet, in Jane Austen’s novel Pride and Prejudice, wants desperately to find a man of character with whom she can fall in love. But is that possible when her family seems determined to play the fool?

  ✓ Jack Ryan, the leading man in a number of Tom Clancy’s novels, is a CIA agent trying to do an excellent job in a world of bureaucrats. Can Jack win against foreign agents and terrorists, or will he be winged by his own side?

  ✓ Scarlett O’Hara, in Margaret Mitchell’s Gone With the Wind, wants to be the belle of the ball forever in a disappearing world of Southern gentility. Can Scarlett find her place when her world is changing in unspeakably horrible ways?

  ✓ Ender Wiggin is a young boy in Orson Scott Card’s novel, Ender’s Game. Ender hopes to be chosen as the military leader who will save humanity from the coming alien “buggers.” But can he survive the jealousy and hatred of his fellow students in Battle School?

Constructing the plot

Plot is the series of actions your characters take to move the story forward. You have to choose these actions carefully. In real life, things often appear to just happen. In your novel, nothing “just happens”; everything that you show must mean something to at least one of your characters. That meaning is what gives your reader a powerful emotional experience. Therefore, your plot must ignore all events that have no meaning.

Plot has several different layers, which we detail in Chapters 8 through 10. 

Each layer of plot is designed to elicit your reader’s emotions. Here, we give examples of four layers of plot and the emotions they evoke (two other layers are the synopsis and scene list):

  ✓ The highest layer of plot is a single-sentence summary of the story. In The Hunt for Red October, by Tom Clancy, a Soviet sub captain tries to defect to the United States — bringing the latest low-noise submarine along with him. This one-sentence summary is designed to stir strong feelings of nationalistic pride in Americans.

  ✓ The next layer of plot is the famous three-act structure, which normally contains a major disaster at the end of the first act, forcing the lead character to commit to the rest of the story. In Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon, a recently married English nurse accidentally time-travels from 1945 back to 1743 Scotland. Her goal to return to the future hits a huge roadblock when she’s forced to marry a charismatic and extremely attractive Scottish outlaw. This disaster commits the lead character into a stormy romance and is designed to make the reader feel maximum conflict between a woman’s love for her two very different husbands.

  ✓ One of the middle layers of plot is the scene, several pages of action that takes place at a single place and time. In a scene in The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follett, bandits steal a 12th-century English stonemason’s pig. The mason, Tom, pursues and fights the bandits, but they get away with his pig — the winter’s food supply for his family. This disastrous ending to the scene is designed to arouse in the reader a feeling of desperation in the face of starvation.

  ✓ The lowest layer of plot is the paragraph. In a fight sequence in Irwin Shaw’s novel Rich Man, Poor Man, a soldier punches a 16-year-old boy in a street brawl. The boy pretends pain from the ineffective blow and then responds with a devastating combination of jabs and punches. This action sequence covers just a few paragraphs and is designed to create in the reader a lurid fascination with a likeable young punk who loves  to fight.
 
You must create your plot in all six layers, with each layer designed to give your reader a powerful emotional experience of your choosing. Most paragraphs should try to deliver some emotive punch. Absolutely every scene needs to deliver some emotive content, although not all scenes have the same intensity — that’d be boring. The scenes should work together to deliver powerful emotional experiences at the high points of the novel. And when the book is over, the reader needs to be left with an overall emotive response to the work as a whole.

Formulating a theme

Every novel means something beyond the bare story that it tells. We call that deep meaning of your story the theme. Your theme does not have to be profound (by which we mean intellectually deep). It’s hard to pull profundity out of your ear, so don’t make that your special burden in life. Your theme can be as simple as “everybody needs to be loved” or “life stinks” or “crime doesn’t pay.”
 
Your burden is to tell a great story, which means nothing more nor less than giving your reader a powerful emotional experience. You can and should try to make your theme emotionally deep. If it also happens to be intellectually deep, then that’s a plus.

Great novels typically probe emotionally deep themes. Consider two examples:

  ✓ In A Tale of Two Cities, Charles Dickens builds a powerful theme of redemption via self-sacrifice. Sydney Carton, a low-living lawyer, loves a woman married to another man. Carton redeems a long life of selfishness by finding a way to save the life of the woman’s husband — at an extraordinary cost to himself. The reader is left with a powerful emotional experience that combines fear, love, rage, and joy.

  ✓ Chaim Potok’s novel, My Name is Asher Lev, examines the dark theme of what makes art great. Asher Lev is an Orthodox Jew in a community that condemns the painting of nudes. When Asher creates his masterpiece, it separates him from his community and his family, giving the reader a powerful emotional experience of triumph mixed with bitter sorrow.
 
Many authors begin their novels by choosing some theme that they want to illustrate. All too often, they believe that this means they don’t have to work hard at building a great story world, three-dimensional characters, and a convincing plot. The result is a sermon masquerading as a story. Beware! Sermons hardly ever give a reader a powerful emotional experience, other than the powerful urge to fall asleep. If you build your story to fit your theme, it’ll feel artificial. Write a great story first, and trust your inner artist to find the deep theme hiding within it. If necessary, you can strengthen your theme during the editing stage.

Expressing your style

As a novelist, you’ll develop a unique way of expressing yourself — a mix of your personality, voice, tone, intellect, sense of humor, and a whole lot more. We call this mix your style. Your style may be complex or simple, flat or flowery, emotive or intellectual.
You’ll find your personal style over time. It’s another tool that lets you give your reader a powerful emotional experience — one that captures your essential being.
  Don’t try to mimic the style of some other author. Study those other authors, of course. Decide what you like in Austen, Twain, Hemingway, Faulkner, and a thousand others. But at the end of the day, realize that you can’t be any of them. You have to be yourself. If you can’t be yourself, who will?Style is an advanced topic. Developing your personal style takes years, and you’ll probably still be tweaking it long after you first get published. Because this is a book on the fundamentals of fiction writing, we don’t cover style in detail.
  Build a strong foundation for your writing by studying story world, characters, plot, and theme. Then write and write and write. Eventually, you’ll find a style all your own. When you’re well-advanced in the craft of fiction, you may find it helpful to get some coaching on style.

Seven Ways to Deliver the Goods

As a novelist, you have seven key tactical tools for giving your reader a powerful emotional experience. These all enter in at the very lowest level of plot — where your story unfolds paragraph by paragraph. You’ll use some of these tools more than others, but you’ll probably use all seven to some extent in every novel you write. A lot depends on your personal taste and on the sort of novel you’re writing. Here are the tools:

  ✓ Action

  ✓ Dialogue

  ✓ Interior monologue (thoughts)

  ✓ Interior emotion

✓ Description

  ✓ Flashback

  ✓ Narrative summary
 
When do you use each of these? How should you mix them? Your yardstick for deciding should always be the same: Use whichever combination gives your reader the biggest, baddest, boldest powerful emotional experience possible.This section shows you what these tools are all about. For more info on these tools, flip to Part II, which covers writing, and Part III, which covers editing.

The here and now: Action

Action is what’s happening right now. Action is Scarlett kissing Rhett. The T-Rex eating the lawyer. The CSI tech finding the murderer’s fingerprint. The marathoner collapsing at the finish line. The sniper pulling the trigger.
 
Action is key to your fiction, but you have to get one thing right: You must always show action happening now. Something that happened two years or two seconds ago is not action. Something that might happen in the future is not action. Something that’s dragging out over minutes or months or millennia is not action. Action happens instant by instant. (Of course, you may be telling your story using past-tense verbs; most novels are narrated in the past tense. But even so, these stories detail action instant by instant.)
Look at two examples. The first shows actions happening in sequence; the second gives some narrative summary with no actions in it, without the visual detail.

  ✓ Example of action: George dropped to the ground, rolled to his left, aimed his Glock at the assassin, and squeezed off a shot. The hired killer screamed and collapsed.

  ✓ Example that’s not action: George evaded the assassin for several min-utes before finally shooting him.
 
Action is sensory. You can see, hear, smell, taste, or feel it. You can photograph it or record it. Editors are always telling writers, “Show, don’t tell.” If they’re talking about an action sequence, they mean that the actions are summarizing something that happened in the past, will happen in the future, or is dragging on over a period of time, or the action can’t be seen, heard, smelled, tasted, or felt.Showing absolutely everything, however, can slow the story down. See the later section, “Supplying narrative summary,” for info on when writers may not need to show things blow-by-blow.

Giving your characters a voice: Dialogue

Dialogue is a special kind of action in which somebody’s talking. Just like any other action, dialogue must be happening right now. The reader wants to hear it exactly the way it’s said, without summary or judgment by the author.Dialogue tells the reader the exact words of the speaker. When editors complain that your dialogue is “telling,” they usually mean that you’re summarizing the words instead of quoting them exactly. At times, you do want to summarize the words — when you want to pass along information quickly. But when you do so, you aren’t writing dialogue; you’re writing narrative summary, which we discuss later in this chapter.
 
Dialogue helps give your reader a powerful emotional experience because it connects directly to a voice. The human voice is primal. The reader can hear each character’s voice and feel its power.

Revealing thoughts: Interior monologue

As a novelist, you have an enormous advantage over the screenwriter: You can show the reader your character’s exact thoughts. The screenwriter is forced to make the viewer guess by showing a closeup of an actor’s face or by using a voiceover (which many moviegoers regard as cheesy).Interior monologue shows the reader what a character is thinking. You can choose from several levels of interior monologue:

  ✓ Quote the thoughts exactly.

  ✓ Summarize them.

  ✓ Give the overall flavor of the thoughts.

You get to decide which form to use — they’re all legitimate.
 
Interior monologue plugs the reader directly into the character’s brain. You can’t get more intimate than that. And intimacy is essential if you want to give your reader a powerful emotional experience.

Feeling with your character: Interior emotion

Interior emotion plugs the reader directly into a character’s feelings. This is the second major advantage the novelist has over the screenwriter. Use it wisely. You have two levels of interior emotion to choose from:

  ✓ Showing your reader the exact physiological responses the character is feeling: This technique is powerful, but a little goes a long way, so don’t overuse it.

  ✓ Telling the reader what emotions the character is having: This is less powerful, but you can use this more often without wearing out your reader. Oftentimes, naming an emotion can weaken it.

Seeing what your character sees: Description

Description means plugging the reader into the character’s senses. The character sees it, hears it, smells it, tastes it, touches it — and the reader does, too. (Be aware that you can summarize description, just as you can summarize action or dialogue. When you do so, you’re using narrative summary, which isn’t what we’re talking about here.) Here’s an example that mixes together a bit of action and several sentences of description: 
Jack focuses his binoculars on the trees at the edge of the forest. An orange and black-striped form swims into view — 400 pounds of muscle and rage. The tiger’s yellow eyes gleam with the last rays of the sun. It opens its mouth and roars, the sound hitting Jack like a hammer half a second later.In this snippet, the reader becomes Jack, doing what Jack does, seeing what he sees, then hearing what he hears. That’s what we mean by description. Many writers overuse description or water it down in narrative summary, but it’s a powerful tool when you use it to put your reader directly inside your character’s skin.
 
Description lets your reader see, hear, smell, taste, and touch what your char-acter sees, hears, smells, tastes, and touches. Don’t confuse this with description that’s disconnected from your characters — that’s part of narrative summary.

Taking a trip to the past: Flashback

A flashback is a nearly instantaneous transition backward in time to show the reader something that happened in a character’s past. Technically, a flashback is a different sort of beast than action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, and description, because a flashback contains all those things. So we’re almost cheating here by classifying flashback alongside them, but there isn’t any other place to put it, so we chose to put it here and not worry about whether our classification scheme is perfect.A flashback has two oddball parts. At the beginning of the flashback, you have to give the reader some sort of cue that you’re changing the time frame. At the end of the flashback, you need to give another cue that you’re returning to the previous point in the story. Between these oddball points, you just proceed normally, as if the past were now.
 
A flashback is a container for action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, and description that happened at some earlier point in the story.

Supplying narrative summary

Narrative summary is exactly what it sounds like: a summary of things that happen some time other than right now. They may have happened in the past. They may be planned for the future. They may be happening sorta kinda now but all dragged out. Narrative summary may be a still-life description of something that exists right now but that isn’t changing in any way.Narrative summary isn’t vivid or immediate, but it’s very efficient. You can quickly cover a lot of ground using narrative summary.The problem with narrative summary is that it isn’t an experience. Your characters can’t see, hear, smell, taste, or feel it. All they can do is remember, plan, summarize, or describe it, and those aren’t nearly as good as experiencing it.
 
In the right time and place, narrative summary can be exceptionally potent. However, beginners often overuse this tool. As a rough rule of thumb, use narrative summary for the less emotive parts of your story, and use action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, and description for the more emotive parts.

Don’t let anyone tell you that you must always “show, don’t tell.” It’d be exhausting to show all the minute details of a character’s life using action,  dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, description, and flashback. Use narrative summary as the glue that holds all these elements together;  you don’t need much glue, but you can’t live without it altogether.





}
Chapter 3: Finding Your Audience and Category {

Chapter 3

Finding Your Audience and Category

In This Chapter

Looking at the types of books you love to read

Identifying the characteristics of your target readers

Choosing a category and audience for your book

Researching your chosen category

There’s no such thing as a one-size-fits-all novel. Your novel must be targeted toward a specific kind of reader (your audience), and it’ll be shelved accordingly in the bookstore with similar books (your category).You have to identify your audience and category before you can sell your book. Agents and publishers don’t want to figure out your target audience and category — they expect you to tell them. If you don’t know, or if you can’t give an intelligible answer, your work may be rejected, no matter how good it is.
 
Professional novelists know their audience and their category. If you want to write professionally, you need to define both of these well enough to enable your publisher to create a marketing plan. We highly recommend that you think about audience and category before you even begin writing. That way, you won’t spend months or years writing a book and only then discover that it’s unmarketable.
In this chapter, you explore what you love to read and write, get to understand your ideal audience, and choose and research a category.

Identifying Your Ideal Novel

You can write the sort of book you most like to read, or you can write the sort of book you’re best suited to write. These aren’t always the same, although many writers and editors believe that they should be. We don’t necessarily agree.
Plenty of successful commercial novelists love to read literary fiction but don’t have the voice or lyrical style that a literary writer must have. Likewise, the world is full of romance writers who secretly enjoy reading science fiction, mystery writers who love romances, and suspense novelists who thrive on historical fiction. No law says you have to write exactly the kind of book you most like to read. The only real requirement is that you read enough of your chosen category to write it well.
 
Write the kind of book that you’re best suited to write. Reading and writing are related, but they aren’t the same thing. So don’t feel guilty if your reading and writing tastes are somewhat different.
On the other hand, if you choose to write the kind of book you like to read, then you’ll be three steps ahead, because you already know the conventions of the category — the do’s and don’ts — and you know what gets readers excited and what turns them off.
What if you’re not sure what kind of novel you’re best suited to write? This section includes some exercises that may help you decide.

Looking at what you love to read
 
Although knowing what kind of book you love to read isn’t a prerequisite to determining which kind of book you should write, it can help you get in touch with where your strengths lie. Here’s how to analyze your reading:

  1.  Take an inventory of your reading habits.

    Make a list of the following:
•The ten novels you love the most

•The ten novels you’ve read most recently

•The ten novels that have affected you most profoundly

You don’t have to be rigid with these lists. If each list doesn’t consist of exactly ten novels, don’t worry. The point is to see what your reading patterns are.

  2.  Analyze what these books have in common.

    Are they all a similar genre (all mysteries, for example, or all romance, fantasy, or suspense)? This gives you a clue about the category that may suit you best.
    Do they all have a similar setting? A similar kind of lead character? A similar type of plot? A similar theme? Are they all written in a powerful style? Your answers give you clues about what your greatest strengths may be as a writer — story world, character, plot, theme, or style. (For details on these elements, see Chapter 2.)

  3.  Make a list of the ten books you’ve hated the most and think about the ways in which these novels differ from the ones you listed in Step 1.
    Does this list suggest any genres that you definitely don’t want to write? Any kinds of plots you dislike? Themes you don’t ever want to explore? Styles that would shame you to tears? Knowing what you don’t want to write can help you narrow your list of what you do.

  4.  Complete this sentence: “The kind of book that I love to read most in 
all the world is, blank.”

    This may not be the kind of book that you want to write, but you’ll probably want to incorporate some elements of the books you like to read into your own work.

Thinking about what you love to write

After you have some idea of the kind of book you want to write, you need to spell it out for yourself in some detail. You’re going to have to explain it to your agent and editor someday.
 
You will not have to give any reasons for what you want to write. You want to write your book because you want to write it. That’s all the reason you ever have to give. All you have to be able to do is describe what you want to write.
 
Take a sheet of paper and answer the following questions. Don’t settle for merely thinking your answers through — write them down. You aren’t committing to anything just yet; you’re simply thinking on paper so you’ll have a record of your thoughts.

✓ Which authors would you most like to write like? You aren’t going to copy anyone’s writing style; your style will be unique, but it’ll be more like that of some authors than others. Write down the names of two or three authors whose style is close to what you envision yours being.

  ✓ What categories interest you most? We talk more about categories later in this chapter. For now, just list one or more that you think you’d like to write for. Typical categories include romance, suspense, mystery, historical, science fiction, fantasy, horror, western, literary, inspirational, children’s, young adult, and so forth. You’re allowed to mix categories, but one of them has to be dominant.

  ✓ What story elements interest you most? Do you want to write a story with a complex story world? Deep characters? A fast-paced, twisty plot? A powerful theme? A unique and captivating style? You can choose more than one of these, but remember that no author in the world is fantastic at all story elements. Remember: Choose what you want to write, not what you think you should write or what you think people expect you  to write.

  ✓ Where and when would you like to set your stories? Name a particular place and a particular time period.

  ✓ What special background or life experiences can you tie into your novel? If you grew up in Afghanistan, for example, then a novel set there would ring especially true. But if you’re from Alabama, Southern fiction may be far easier for you to write and sell.

  ✓ What length of book would you most like to write? A short novel runs around 60,000 words. A medium-length book is 80,000 to 90,000 words. A long book is anything over 120,000 words. You probably won’t be able to nail down a particular length, but you probably gravitate toward novellas or massive epic sagas or mid-length novels.

There are no wrong answers to the preceding questions; however, some kinds of books may be much easier to sell than others. If you want to write a book that doesn’t have much of an audience, then write it. But be aware that marketing it to an agent or publisher — and ultimately, to readers — will be an uphill battle.

Defining Your Ideal Reader

Enough about you. Now it’s time to think about your reader (that’s reader in the abstract sense — you’ll have more than one in real life). You’re going to find a publisher willing to invest in your book only if you can persuade that publisher that there are readers who’ll want to buy and read it.

Many writers think that to get published, they need to appeal to a huge, broad target audience. Ultimately, yes, you’d like to have a lot of readers. But at the beginning of your career, you need to think narrow rather than broad. The early marketing has to focus on somebody. A marketing plan that targets everybody is going to be incredibly expensive, and it’s also likely to dilute the message.
 
Your book’s overall appeal will depend on how well you write your story, not on the size of your target audience. What small niche of readers can you interest better than any other author in the world? These few readers will burn hottest when you light your marketing flame. If you can find them, they’ll help you find a broader audience.
This section helps you envision your ideal reader. If your ideal reader is a lot like you, you’ll understand your reader’s mindset well as you write. If your ideal reader looks nothing like you, that’s fine — as long as you do your homework and figure out how your target reader thinks.

Considering worldview and interests
 
These questions may be the most critical ones you consider: How do your ideal readers think about the world? What captures their interest? Are your ideal readers

  ✓ Religious or not particularly so? If religious, are they Christian, Jewish, Muslim, or Buddhist, for example? If not religious, are they agnostic, atheist, or just not interested?

  ✓ Political or not especially so? If political, what party are they affiliated with? Are they conservative or liberal? Militarist or pacifist?

  ✓ Well-educated, or not inclined to consider education a priority?

  ✓ Interested in auto racing? Molecular biology? Parenting? Immigration issues? Submarine technology? Erotic liaisons? Hegelian philosophy? Gambling? Camel milking?
You have a profound opportunity to define your ideal reader in a way that excites your publisher. If you can show that you’ve identified some core-group of readers who will love your novel, then you’ve found an audience worthy of a focused marketing plan. Here are some novels with well-defined target audiences:

  ✓ Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code was targeted at readers skeptical of the official history of early Christianity. The novel combined lightning action with a series of intellectual puzzles that captured the imagination of the target audience and led to incredible word-of-mouth publicity.

✓ William P. Young’s The Shack took aim at conservative Christian readers wanting answers to the tough theological question “How can a good and all-powerful God allow evil?” The novel touched the hearts and minds of these readers, leading to explosive sales.
Note that these two novels target completely separate audiences. The marketing campaign of each one was designed to appeal to a core audience, not to some vague “everybody.” Both campaigns were far more effective because they were focused. 
These next two novels also appeal to polar opposite audiences. Both have succeeded because of their sharply defined niches, not in spite of them.

  ✓ Tom Clancy’s The Hunt For Red October created a new subgenre, the military technothriller. Designed to appeal to military men and political conservatives, the novel gained traction when people discovered that “everybody in Washington” was reading the book, including Pentagon top brass and even (according to rumors) then-President Ronald Reagan.

  ✓ Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale created a post-nuclear apocalyptic world with a female protagonist required to serve as a child-bearing vessel for a couple rendered infertile by radiation. The novel targeted pro-choice women, but its powerful message took it to a far larger audience.

Looking at gender

We bet you’re not surprised to hear this: Men and women think differently. They read different kinds of books. They tend to like different kinds of things (though we all know plenty of people who cross those pesky gender lines). Now answer this quickly: Are you writing mainly for men or women?
If you said either “men” or “women,” then your target audience is likely to be sharply focused along gender lines. That’s neither good nor bad; it’s simply the way it is, and knowing the answer can help you appeal to your audience and help your publisher define your marketing plans.
What if you just aren’t sure? In that case, your book probably won’t be very gender-specific. Again, this is neither good nor bad; it’s just a fact that will guide your publisher in marketing your book.

Writing for readers of a certain age

When you envision your typical readers, how old are they? Children? Early teens? Later teens? Twenty-somethings? Thirty to fifty? Fifty-plus? Each of these age groups has different reading habits. Each age group responds differently to cover art, titles, and back-cover copy. Your publisher will build your marketing plan around the age group of your target readers.  The most successful novel series in publishing history has been the Harry Potter series. Who was the target audience? Young adults! Not exactly “everybody,” was it? But those kids talked it up, and before you could say “Alohamora!” everybody was reading the magical tales of the boy wizard.

Defining your niche

Word of mouth is the best thing going in marketing a novel. Therefore, your publisher will want a sharply focused niche group that it can target when your book launches. If your novel is strong, that niche group will talk . . . and talk. Then word of mouth will carry the message far outside that niche.
 
Don’t worry too much about making your book more marketable. If your book appeals to a small segment of readers, you’ll probably face less competition, and you may be able to dominate your niche more easily. Being a big fish in a small bowl is easier, and big fish often move on to bigger bowls.
 
Write a paragraph describing your ideal reader as precisely as you can — age, gender, political and religious affiliation, hobbies, thought patterns, likes, dislikes. Slam it down on paper as fast as you can. Edit it tomorrow. Save it for later. Your marketing director will love you for it someday.

Understanding Your Category

When the bookstore employees unpack your book from the cardboard box in which it was delivered, which shelf are they going to put it on?
Take a mental walk through the fiction section of your favorite bookstore. You probably see sections with different labels — fiction (or literature), romance, thrillers (or suspense), mystery, true crime, historical, western, science fiction, fantasy, horror, children, young adults (or teens), inspirational fiction (or religious fiction or Christian fiction), and more. If you wander through a dozen stores, you’ll probably find that they all label their sections a little differently. You may see certain combinations of labels, such as “mysteries and thrillers” or “fiction and literature.” Sometimes true crime is a subsection of mystery.
Labels make two kinds of distinctions. Most of them define a genre, or common class of books, such as romance, mystery, or thriller. But several of these labels define a target audience — for example, children, young adults, or religious people. To confound things, the sections that target particular audiences each contain books from most of the genres. So you can find mys-teries not only in the main mystery section but also in the children, young adults, and Christian sections.
Confusing, isn’t it? Because bookstores define categories in different ways, we’re going to stick pretty closely to the set of categories defined by Publisher’s Weekly, the trade journal of the publishing industry. Here are the categories we discuss in this section:

  ✓ Romance

  ✓ Thriller

  ✓ Mystery/crime

  ✓ Science fiction and fantasy

  ✓ Horror

  ✓ General/literary

  ✓ Inspirational

  ✓ Women’s fiction

  ✓ Children

  ✓ Young adult

  You have to choose one primary category for your novel. You can mix categories, but if you do, one category must still be dominant. The dominant category usually determines where the bookstore employees choose to shelve your book, so an inspirational romance will (almost always) go on the Inspirational shelves. Likewise, a literary mystery will (probably) end up in the Literary section. A young adult fantasy will go with the Young Adult novels. The bookstore staff has the ultimate say on where to shelve books, of course, so you may be surprised.

Genres: Surveying categories based on content

When a category or subcategory has a set of well-defined rules that determine the broad parameters of the story, it’s called a genre. Typical genres include romance, thrillers, mysteries, science fiction, fantasy, and horror. We discuss those categories and others in this section. (Historical fiction is a special genre with special issues, which we talk about in the sidebar titled “What happened to historical novels?”)

Romance

If you want to break into fiction writing, there may be no better avenue than to write a romance novel. Smirk all you want, but the romance novelists are taking it to the bank. More than 40 percent of all novels sold these days fit the romance category. The market for it is huge, and romance fans are vora-cious readers.
Romance novels almost always tell the story of an unmarried man and woman getting together, and they almost always have happy endings. The typical reader is female (we hope this isn’t too much of a surprise), and the genre spans all age groups. Romance includes a bewildering variety of sub-genres, ranging from the wildest erotica to the tamest sweet romances.
 The world of romance fiction is a world of narrowly defined niches. You must know your niche well, because there isn’t much slack here. Romance novels tend to focus on the character and story world elements rather than on plot and theme, although the rule isn’t ironclad.
Most publishers of romances list their exact requirements on their Web sites — and we aren’t kidding when we use the word exact. Typical requirements specify a precise word count, the ages of the hero and heroine, how early in the book they must meet, and many other details.
For more advice on writing romance, check out Writing a Romance Novel For Dummies, by Leslie Wainger (Wiley).

Thrillers

The terms thriller and suspense novel are used interchangeably in the industry. Thrillers come in many varieties, including action-adventure, techno thriller, legal thriller, war novel, and spy novel. These stories typically have a strong plot and may also shine in story world or characters. Theme is rarely a central aspect of a thriller.
Readers of all ages, both men and women, love this genre. Some thrillers, such as military technothrillers, tilt more toward men, whereas others, such as romantic suspense, are aimed more at women. Overall, however, the genre is reasonably gender-balanced. The appropriate level of violence in your story depends on the age and gender of your target reader.
 
The thrillers category is broad, so you need to choose your niche within the genre carefully to define your audience. You have tremendous freedom to create a new subgenre or make an existing one your own, as Tom Clancy did with technothrillers and John Grisham did with legal thrillers.This genre is highly marketable, so if you love thrillers, don’t hesitate to commit to it. The bestseller lists are packed with books in this category. However, the genre is competitive, so breaking in may not be easy for new novelists.

Mystery/crime

The mystery/crime genre is closely related to thrillers, but it always includes an intellectual puzzle to be solved, usually a murder but occasionally some other crime. The genre requires that the perpetrator be found and brought to justice, so the reader must not know who the bad guy is until the end of the book. (If you violate this rule, you’re not writing a mystery; you’re writing a thriller.) Mysteries are almost always shelved in the mystery section of the bookstore; one exception seems to be the serial-killer novel, which may end up shelved with thrillers.
Both men and women enjoy the mystery genre, which crosses all age lines, so the category is very broad. It has many subgenres, including police procedurals, private investigator novels, and cozy mysteries featuring amateur detectives. Many bookstores also include a shelf of true crime books (although these aren’t exactly novels, they use the storytelling techniques of the fiction writer, so classing them here is appropriate). As with thrillers, you have quite a bit of freedom to define your own special kind of mystery.
Mysteries are intellectual puzzles first, but you have plenty of options on which story element comes second — plot (which has an emotive element) or character is a common choice, but a unique story world can also make your book stand out in the crowd. The requirements of the mystery genre may be tightly defined by some publishing houses and loosely defined by others.
 
Like readers of the romance genre, mystery lovers read voraciously, so the market demands a constant stream of new titles. The mystery genre is a strong choice, and it gives you a lot of options. You must study the genre carefully before you try to write your mystery, but an unknown novelist has a good shot at breaking into this category.

Science fiction and fantasy

Science fiction and fantasy (SF&F) novels inspire fanatical readers who may avidly follow an author through a long series. Several of the best-selling fiction works of all time have been fantasies, including The Lord of the Rings and the Harry Potter series.

Within science fiction, you have numerous options, ranging from hard-science novels to space opera set in a galaxy far away. Likewise, fantasy has many subgenres. This category seems to be wide open to wildly new and inventive ideas, so if you have something truly weird, it may be the Next  Big Thing. As always, the quality of your writing will determine whether you succeed.
In both science fiction and fantasy, constructing your story world is enormously important. This process, called world-building, is a requirement for any serious writer in this genre.
 
Science fiction and fantasy is not the largest genre, but its readers are exceptionally loyal. Study the genre before you write. Even unknown writers have a reasonable hope of getting published in SF&F. Certain publishers specialize in SF&F, so go over their current listings and their Web sites closely to track which sorts of projects they may be interested in.

Horror

The purpose of horror fiction is to inspire mind-bending, gut-wrenching fear in your readers and then resolve that fear in some way. The horror section of your bookstore is probably smaller than most of the other sections, but if horror’s your thing, pursue it. One of the most successful writers of our time, Stephen King, has seen enormous success in this genre.
In horror fiction, either character or plot typically plays the major role, although you can make story world or theme the star. The rules of horror seem to be a bit less restrictive than those of some of the other genres, so you have quite a bit of freedom to define what a horror novel should be.
 
Horror is a small genre, so it may be more difficult to break into than some of the others. In this genre, possibly more than in any other, your ability to create a powerful emotional experience determines your success.

General/literary

The general/literary category applies to fiction that doesn’t fit within any of the preceding genres. A novel is literary if it’s language- and character-driven; otherwise, it’s general fiction. Usually, literary fiction is written with a unique and beautiful style and is more intellectually demanding than general fiction.Any of the genres we’ve listed earlier can be a literary novel. You can write a literary romance, thriller, or mystery, for example. In that case, the book usually goes in the literary section, but the decision is really up to the bookstore, and a lot depends on how your publisher markets you. The classification of fiction is complicated, and we can’t give you a general rule for it.
The general/literary category is very competitive, and breaking into it is hard for new writers. Very few rules exist regarding what you can write about or how you should proceed. You can be as strongly oriented toward story world, character, plot, theme, or style as you like. The main requirement is that your fiction be truly excellent. Many fine novelists are trying to sell their work, so you can’t sell a mediocre manuscript or even a pretty good one.
Many other novels will be fighting for shelf space with yours, so a published novel in the general/literary category may not sell very well. But even if the royalties for your novel make your accountant weep, you’ll likely find this category artistically satisfying to write. Of course, some authors do extremely well in this category, so write your best novel and see where it takes you.
 
Absolute excellence in your craft is the main requirement for selling your novel in the general/literary category. “Good enough” is not good enough. You may never be able to quit your day job by writing in this category, but you’ll very likely respect the person you see in the mirror every morning.

Understanding audience-based categories

In some cases, your novel’s primary category is defined by your target audience rather than by the kind of story you’re writing. (For more on choosing a target audience, see the earlier section “Defining Your Ideal Reader.”) Take a look at some of these categories.

Inspirational fiction

Christian publishing houses produce most inspirational fiction, so people often use the terms inspirational fiction and Christian fiction interchangeably. The category almost always shows one or more characters on a spiritual journey.
The Christian fiction market has been the fastest-growing segment of the publishing world over the last several years. As a high-growth category, it’s very open to new writers.
Christian publishers accept fiction in just about any genre (see the earlier section “Genres: Surveying categories based on content”). Be aware that certain subcategories — romance, women’s fiction, suspense, and historical romance — dominate this market. Mysteries do fairly well. Fantasy, science fiction, horror, and literary fiction are very tough sells, although there have been some notable successes.
The romance and mystery subcategories tend to be tightly defined in terms of plot requirements, but all other subcategories within inspirational fiction allow you quite a bit of freedom in your story. Foul language and adult situations are almost never allowed to be shown (though they can happen “off-camera”).
 
If you decide to write inspirational fiction, read enough in the category to get a good feel for what’s allowed. You must understand and respect your readers’ worldview. Study the unwritten rules of the market carefully.

Women’s fiction

Women’s fiction includes novels specifically geared to women’s interests. They may be love stories (requited or not), friendship stories, or stories that otherwise involve women’s issues. These novels may have happy endings or unhappy endings. The only real rule with women’s fiction is that it should deal with issues specific to women.
This category is very broad and has a lot of overlap with romance and gen-eral/literary fiction. As we note in the preceding section, women’s fiction is very popular in Christian fiction. Bookstores may choose to shelve women’s fiction in any of these categories.
Do you have to be a woman to write women’s fiction? No, but we suspect it helps. What you must do is to connect well with your readers, who will be overwhelmingly women. If you write well, you have a good chance of getting published in this category and earning a fair bit of money.

Children’s fiction

Children’s fiction includes stories for anyone up to about age 12. There are several different age ranges and many different publishers. This is a highly specialized field, with different rules for each age group.

The children’s fiction category includes a number of subcategories. Your best bet is to study the Web sites of the publishers who do the particular type of book you want to write. They can tell you what your parameters are.
 
You must respect your audience. Children know when you’re talking down to them. Define your niche carefully and then do your homework. You need to study children’s fiction extremely carefully before you try writing it.For more information on writing for children (and teens), consider picking up a copy of Writing Children’s Books For Dummies, by Lisa Rojany Buccieri and Peter Economy (Wiley).

Young adult fiction

Young adult (YA) fiction is typically written for the 12-to-18 age bracket. Like children’s fiction, this is a very specialized field, and you need to study the existing books carefully.
Young adult fiction offers quite a bit of latitude. The genres are not so precisely defined, and you have freedom to step out and create something entirely new, as J. K. Rowling did with her Harry Potter series and Stephenie Meyer did with her Twilight series.
You can write YA fiction in most of the genres available for adults — romance, thrillers, mysteries, science fiction, fantasy, or horror. If you choose to write in one of these genres, read a number of similar books and study the guidelines of your target publishers.
 
Young adults are practically adults, but they don’t belong to your generation. You’re probably an old fogey to them, so you need to spend enough time with them enough to understand their language and culture.

Picking your category and subcategory
 
The preceding sections discuss the major categories at some length. Before you begin writing your novel, you need to make two decisions. Get out a piece of paper and answer these questions:

  ✓ What is your book’s major category?

  ✓ What is your book’s specific subcategory?

Decide this now — rather than after 400 pages of hard work on a novel that may turn out to belong to no discernible category with no particular audience.
 
After you choose your category, read enough novels in your category so that you’re an expert in it. You need to know what’s been done a zillion times and what will be considered new and fresh. We can’t tell you that — it’s up to you to read, read, read until you know your category inside out.

Finding Your Category’s Requirements

Different categories have very different requirements. In the earlier sections of this chapter, we talk about identifying your specific category, subcategory, and audience. We also ask you to identify several authors you’d like to emulate in your writing. If you haven’t done those tasks yet, do them now, because in this section, you use that information to figure out the special requirements for your book.
 
Write down the following requirements list for your novel, and as you read this section, fill in the blanks:

  ✓ Word count: _______________

  ✓ Number of major characters: _____

  ✓ Story’s acceptable levels of the following elements (on a scale of 0 to 10):

	 •	Romantic	tension:	_____

	 •	Sensuality:	_____

	 •	Humor:	_____

	 •	Spirituality:	_____

	 •	Offensive	language:	_____

	 •	Action/adventure:	_____

	 •	Violence:	_____

	 •	Suspense:	_____

	 •	Enigma:	_____

  ✓ Emotional driver: _______________

Targeting your word count

Novels for adults typically run from 60,000 to 120,000 words or more. An average-length novel is between 80,000 and 100,000 words. These ranges are pretty wide, so you may be thinking that you don’t need to worry about your word count. Maybe; maybe not.
Certain publishing houses have tight word-count requirements. This is especially true of specialized lines of romance novels, where the number of pages may be exactly defined and you aren’t given much margin of error at all. If you’re writing a romance novel, you may already be targeting a particular line. Look up the guidelines on that publisher’s Web site and find out right now what the word count of your novel needs to be.
Other categories in which you may have tight word-count requirements are mysteries or science fiction novels that fit into an existing line. If you’re targeting one of these, check the publisher’s Web site for requirements.
Children’s novels are generally much shorter than novels for adults, and books for young adults are often shorter than adult-level novels, but they can be long in exceptional cases. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, by J. K. Rowling, ran to 255,000 words.
 
For any category, you can always make a rough estimate of your target word count by choosing a book in your category that’s about the length of the book you’d like to write. Find a full page of text in the middle of the first chapter and count the words on that page. Multiply this by the number of pages. Round the result to the nearest 5,000 words.
For example, suppose you count 321 words on the second page and you see that the book has 418 pages. Multiplying those two numbers gives you 134,178 words. Rounding that to the nearest 5,000 words gives you an estimate of 135,000 words. Write that down as your target word count. (That’s a pretty long book, by the way.)

Accounting for major characters

Your novel will have a certain group of characters who get most of the air-time. If you have too few major characters, you may not have a dense enough storyline. If you have too many, you may dilute your story and confuse your readers. You don’t need to pick an exact number of main characters before you write, but you do need to know what a reasonable number is for your category.

How many can you have? The minimum number of characters is obviously one, although most novels have more. The maximum number can be quite large. The Godfather had at least ten major characters. The Lord of the Rings had dozens.
Again, a lot depends on your category. If you’re writing a romance novel, you probably need a hero and heroine and possibly a villain or love interest. That may well be all the major characters you need — it’s enough for a classic love triangle — although you’ll have plenty of minor characters.
On the other hand, if you’re writing a mystery, you need a corpse and a detective. You also need several suspects, some friends for your detective, and some antagonists. That can add up to a dozen important characters.
 
Think of a few books that are like the one you want to write. How many major characters do they have? Two? Five? Ten? Twenty? Pick a number that seems reasonable and write that down. (Note: You may get a better idea of how many characters you need if you think of which roles you need to fill — heroes, villains, sidekicks, and so on. See Chapter 7 for details.)

Determining levels of action, romance, and all that

Readers of different categories and subcategories have extremely different ideas of what’s acceptable in a novel. You need to think about what those expectations are in advance. If you write a novel that isn’t acceptable to your audience, then a publisher isn’t going to care whether it’s acceptable to you; the publisher is in business to sell books.
 
The purpose of this exercise is to make sure you know — before you write your book — what’s appropriate to your reading audience for your category. This can save you years of wasted effort, so it’s worth taking some time to do this work now. Here’s how to get a sense of reader expectations and set some guidelines for your novel:

  1.  Understand the different story aspects, including romantic tension, sensuality, humor, spirituality, offensive language, action/adventure, violence, suspense, and enigma.    

We discuss these story aspects later in this section.

  2.  Consider how much of each aspect appears in other novels in your category.

Where can you find the official rules on what’s acceptable? You can’t. That’s why you should be reading books in your chosen category — so you can sort out the unspoken rules that everybody knows.
    We like to rate books on a scale of 0 to 10 in each story aspect. For example, the amount of violence in Pride and Prejudice is very low — we rate it a 0. The amount of romantic tension is high — we give it a 10.
    Note: Try to measure quantity, not quality. For example, the amount of violence in the movie Casablanca is moderate — we give it a 5. The amount of violence in Rambo is much higher — probably a 10. The quantity of violence in each movie is about what its viewers expect, and you could argue that the quality of violence in each case is therefore high. But whenever quality becomes an issue, endless arguments ensue, which we’d rather avoid.

  3.  Decide how much of each story aspect is acceptable to your ideal reader.
    Usually, you assign a range of values. For example, if you’re writing a romance novel, your audience expects a lot of romantic tension, so you probably want a range of 9–10. For certain categories, your audience won’t really care about certain aspects, so you may be able to assign a full range of 0–10.
    Can you push the edges of acceptability as you write? Yes, of course. Bend the edges, but don’t break them. If you don’t know where that fine line is, then read some more books in your category or talk to experienced authors, agents, or editors.
Now look over the following list, which defines the story aspects and gives you a general idea of the categories in which high or low levels of those aspects may be essential:

  ✓ Romantic tension: Romantic tension is the potential for love in a story. Romance novels and women’s fiction typically require high levels of romantic tension. Most other genres consider a wide range acceptable — a little, a lot, or anything in between. Children’s fiction typically has very little romantic tension.

  ✓ Sensuality: Sensuality is explicit sexual activity in a story. Some romance subcategories accept very little sensuality, and some erotic subcategories require the maximum. Children’s fiction and Christian fiction allow essentially none. Most other categories tolerate a fairly wide range of sensuality.

✓ Humor: Humor is anything that’s funny. Most fiction is improved by a bit of humor, but incorporating it is tricky because people’s tastes in humor vary widely. All the categories of fiction allow a wide range here. This is the one story aspect you get to decide, and you probably won’t violate your reader’s expectations, no matter which category you write for.

  ✓ Spirituality: Spirituality is a sense of transcendence over the material world. In most categories, less spirituality is considered preferable to more. However, Christian fiction generally prefers more, so long as it keeps within the bounds of historic Christianity. Literary fiction is accepting of a high level of spirituality of just about any flavor, as long as it meets the demanding standards of literary quality. Some fantasy subcategories also favor high levels of spirituality, often in unconventional directions.

  ✓ Offensive language: Offensive language is language that is crude or uses curse words. Most readers in most categories accept a wide range of offensive language these days. Obvious exceptions are children’s fiction and Christian fiction, which accept essentially none. Readers of military fiction and certain kinds of thrillers and crime fiction generally expect very high levels of offensive language.

  ✓ Action/adventure: Action/adventure includes excitement along the lines of car chases, burning buildings, narrow escapes from death, exploding helicopters, and shooting. It doesn’t necessarily include violence, which involves bodily injury. Some categories, such as thrillers and some types of mysteries, expect high levels of action. Other categories, such as women’s fiction and romance, generally expect much less. Most other categories accept a wide range.

  ✓ Violence: Violence involves bodily injury, blood, broken bones, or death. As with action, violence is not merely accepted but expected in most thrillers and many mysteries. It’s far less acceptable in romance, women’s fiction, Christian fiction, and children’s fiction. All other categories are accepting of a very wide range of violence.

  ✓ Suspense: Suspense is the anticipation of something horrible. This is different from both action and violence. The movie Witness is an example of a story with quite a lot of suspense but not much action or violence. Thrillers and mysteries generally have very high levels of suspense. Romance, women’s fiction, and children’s fiction have much less (with the exception of romantic suspense). All other categories allow a very wide range.

✓ Enigma: An enigma is an unsolved puzzle, secret, or mystery that requires a solution. Mysteries obviously require high levels of this aspect. Thrillers often have quite a lot of enigma (in cases where the reader doesn’t know who the villain is), but they can also have none at all (in novels where the reader sees both the hero and villain with equal time). Because any unexplained secret contributes an atmosphere of enigma, this component is very acceptable in any category, even children’s fiction or romance, where long-buried family secrets are a staple. However, enigma isn’t required in any category except mysteries.
Why don’t we simply give you a table of acceptable ranges for all the categories? Because we can’t. There are a very large number of subcategories, and nobody could possibly keep track of the tastes of the audiences for all of them for all age ranges. Your job as a writer is to define your target audience and category (as we explain earlier in the chapter), research your tiny little niche of the market, and figure out the boundaries for yourself.

Identifying your story’s emotional driver

Fiction is about giving your reader a powerful emotional experience. Therefore, every story must have one or more emotional drivers — the particular emotions that you’re trying to excite in your reader. It’s easy to make a long list of possible emotional drivers: love, lust, fear, horror, jealousy, anger, revenge, greed, sorrow, guilt, and so on.
 
Decide which emotions your novel will deliver. Choose two or three. They should be appropriate to your category, but choosing very different emotions is quite all right. One of them should be primary; you add the others for extra flavor. Remember that having too many drivers is as bad as having too few, so limit yourself. You can save some for your next novel.
The main requirement here is that if you’re writing in a category that demands one particular emotional driver, then that needs to be your primary driver. If you’re writing a romance, love has to be your primary driver. If you’re writing a thriller, you should use fear or horror instead. Aside from this limitation, you’re free to choose almost any combination of emotional drivers that you want, so long as they’re all considered acceptable within your category. (For example, the lust driver won’t be accepted in children’s fiction or Christian fiction; likewise, depression wouldn’t fly very well in a James Bond type spy novel.)

MARGINALIA:

Join the club: Writing associations for your category

Joining a professional writing association can be a good way to understand more about your category, network with other writers, discover more about publishing, and compete for awards for  published  and  unpublished  works.  Here are some major writing associations and the awards they offer. Some associations require that you have a novel or several short stories in that category published before you can join; others  are  open  to  anyone  with  an  interest. Check their Web sites for details.

 ✓  American  Christian  Fiction  Writers (ACFW): ACFW sponsors the Book of the Year  Awards  for  published  novels  and novellas, along with the Genesis Awards for unpublished manuscripts. Visit www.acfw.com.

 ✓  Horror  Writers  Association  (HWA):  HWA sponsors the Bram Stoker Awards. You can find the HWA online at www.horror.org.

 ✓  Mystery  Writers  of  America  (MWA): MWA  sponsors  the  Edgar  Awards  for published  mystery  novels.  Go  to  www.mysterywriters.org.

 ✓  Romance Writers of America (RWA): RWA sponsors the prestigious RITA Awards for published romance novels and the Golden Heart Awards for unpublished manuscripts. You  can  find  the  organization  at  www.rwanational.org.

 ✓  Science  Fiction  &  Fantasy  Writers  of America  (SFWA):  SFWA  sponsors  the Nebula Awards, the Andre Norton Award, and  the  Ray  Bradbury  Award.  Find  the SFWA online at www.sfwa.org.

 ✓  Society  of  Children’s  Book  Writers  & Illustrators  (SCBWI):  SCBWI  sponsors the Golden Kite Awards and several other awards. If you write children’s or young adult literature, check out the SCBWI at www.scbwi.org.

What happened to historical novels?

A historical novel is a novel set in a time period significantly earlier than the date of publication. For example, if you write a novel set in World War I, that’d be considered a historical novel; however, a novel written in 1918 and set in that year wouldn’t. The line between a recent contemporary novel and a historical is a bit fuzzy, but “more than 50 years ago” is probably close to the mark.
If you love historical novels, be aware that few bookstores have a shelf for historicals, so you’ll need to adopt some other category and add the word historical in front of it. You can do this with most of the genres. Take a look at some of the many examples of historical novels that have done well in each of the major categories.

Historical romance novels:

 ✓  Gone With the Wind, by Margaret Mitchell, captures the South during the Civil War era in exquisite detail.

 ✓  Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon, details the time of the Jacobite Rising in 18th-century Scotland.

Historical thrillers:

 ✓  River God, by Wilbur Smith, is a riveting suspense novel set in 18th-century B.C.E. Egypt at the time of the Hyksos invasion.

 ✓  The  Pillars  of  the  Earth,  by  Ken  Follett, recounts the building of a cathedral in 12th-century England.

Historical mysteries:

 ✓  The Quality of Mercy, by Faye Kellerman, features William Shakespeare as a player.

 ✓  The Arms of Nemesis, by Steven Saylor, stars a detective in Ancient Rome.

Historical fantasy and science fiction:

 ✓  Taliesin,  by  Stephen  R.  Lawhead  (along with its sequels Merlin and Arthur), is set in Arthurian Britain.

 ✓  The Difference Engine, by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, tells an alternate history of London in the 1850s, where Charles Babbage has constructed his mechanical computer, the difference engine.

Historical general fiction:

 ✓  The  First  Man  in  Rome,  by  Colleen McCullough, along with its sequels, is set in Ancient Rome.

 ✓  The Clan of the Cave Bear, by Jean Auel, along with several sequels, is set in Ice Age Europe.

Historical literary fiction:

 ✓  The Red Tent, by Anita Diamant, features the  women  in  the  family  of  the  biblical Jacob.

 ✓  The Name of the Rose, by Umberto Eco, a serial-killer novel, takes place in an anonymous  14th-century  Italian  abbey.  This novel is a historical literary mystery, but it’s typically shelved in the thrillers section of bookstores. Go figure.

 ✓  Girl with a Pearl Earring, by Tracy Chevalier, is set in the home of 17th-century artist Jan Vermeer.

You can sell your historical novel, but you must first assign it to one of the well-established categories. A historical novel gives you one competitive advantage: By creating a unique and spellbinding story world, you add zest to your novel’s primary category.


}
Chapter 4: Four Ways to Write a Great Novel {

Chapter 4

Four Ways to Write a Great Novel

In This Chapter

Getting it written before getting it right

Investigating four creative paradigms for completing a novel

Understanding why your paradigm matters

Finding and using the right creative paradigm for you

People usually write novels in several drafts, and writers agree that the first draft doesn’t have to be perfect. Many writers will tell you frankly that their first drafts are a crime against the humanities. But they write a first draft anyway, because you can’t write a second draft until you’ve done a first. So your first task as a writer is to give yourself permission to write a first draft that stinks.
Be aware that there’s more than one way to get through that first draft and then edit it to completion. You need to find the creative paradigm that works best for you. By creative paradigm, we mean the method you use to write the first draft and then edit it through all successive drafts until it’s as perfect as you can make it.
You may be astonished to discover that professional writers have wildly different creative paradigms. Some plan everything meticulously. Others jump right in and just start typing. In this chapter, we explore in detail a number of ways that seasoned writers work, and we give you ideas to help you find your own creative paradigm. In the final analysis, the right creative paradigm is the one that works for you.

Giving Yourself Permission  to Write Badly

On the day you sit down to start writing your first novel, you discover something deep about yourself. Some writers pounce on that blank document, eager to slam down the story at warp speed. Others stare at the first empty page, frozen by fear of writing something wrong. Which kind are you?

Most writers work in two distinct modes:

  ✓ Creative mode: In creative mode, you give yourself the freedom to try different things, with the understanding that they may work and they may not. Writing badly in creative mode is okay. Everyone expects that a lot of what you write in creative mode will be bad (and of course, some will be good). Creation is anarchy, so get a little crazy when you’re being creative. That’s what you’re supposed to do.

  ✓ Editing mode: In editing mode, your goal is to clean up the mess that you made in creative mode. You analyze what you wrote, you recognize the good stuff, you throw away the bad stuff, and you straighten it all out so it makes good sense.
Writer’s block is what happens when a writer tries to write in both creative mode and editing mode at the same time. Don’t do that! It’s like driving with your foot on the gas and the brakes at the same time. Creating a little and then editing a little is okay — just don’t edit it before you’ve actually written the words! As the old saying goes, get it written; then get it right.
You always write your first draft in creative mode. When we talk about a first draft, we mean the first version you write on the page or type on the screen. Everything after that is edited copy. If you’re doing your job right, some of your first draft will be excellent, and some will be awful. Your goal is to make sure that all of your final draft is excellent, and the only way to get there is to start with a first draft, no matter how bad.
  Give yourself permission to be bad on the first draft. After all, your editor isn’t going to see that first draft. Just get it written. Later on, when you go into editing mode, you can worry about making it pretty. After you finish editing, everyone will think that you were brilliant all along. Only you’ll know the truth, and you don’t have to tell anyone.

On a blank piece of paper, write out this sentence: “I have full permission to write a really bad first draft, because I know that most first drafts by most authors are mostly lame. I’ll get it right on the revision.” Put today’s date at the top and your signature at the bottom and post it over your workspace.

Creative Paradigms: Investigating Various Writing Methods

We’ve identified and named at least four creative paradigms, or writing methods, that novelists use to create the first drafts of their stories:

  ✓ Seat-of-the-pants: Just write straight through without planning or editing.

  ✓ Edit-as-you-go: Write without planning but edit thoroughly as you go.

  ✓ Snowflake: Make a general plan and write, changing the plan along the way.

  ✓ Outline: Make a detailed plan before you write anything, adhering to it strictly.

When we were planning this book, our editor asked us to identify which of these is the right creative paradigm for writing a novel. But the truth is that such a beast doesn’t exist. Good (even great) novelists use any of these methods.
In this section, we describe each of these creative paradigms and explain how and why they work. Later, we help you figure out which one’s a good  fit for you.

Writing without planning or editing

The method of writing without planning or editing is commonly called seat-of-the-pants (SOTP) writing. Typically, you start with a few fragments of the story in mind. When you sit down to write, you just start typing, going wherever your fingers take you.
This method is exhilarating, no doubt about it. When you write SOTP fiction, the twists and turns in the plot surprise you as much as they surprise your reader. The story seems to take on a life of its own, and you may well say, “I didn’t kill Richard. I walked into the room and found him dead!”

For some SOTP writers, the fun is in the first draft, and editing is a punishment they have to endure. Never knowing what’s going to happen, they just enjoy the ride. They write and write — at speeds of up to 2,000 words per hour — happily drilling out story. For these writers, however, the day of reckoning comes on the second draft, when they have to edit it all. Because the entire story was unplanned, they have to rethink some characters. Some plot twists are now obviously mistakes. They have to throw out whole chapters or whole sequences of chapters. And they have to move or revise other chapters heavily.
For other SOTP writers, the first draft is agony, but editing is bliss. Having no plan, every new scene of the first draft is fraught with danger. What if this scene doesn’t go anywhere? What if that new character tries to take over the story? What if today’s work turns out to be all for nothing? But after the laborious first draft is finished, the fun begins for these writers, because they love revisions. Now they happily cut and paste and delete. They rethink their characters, finding whole new backstories, values, motivations, and goals  for them.
  If you’re going to write by the seat of your pants, you need to be willing to rewrite heavily. When you finish that first draft, it’s going to have a lot of characters, plot threads, and ideas — many of which will be inconsistent or incomplete. At that point, you’ll understand your story pretty well, but you’ll need to be ruthless in your editing and do the following:

  ✓ Rethink your entire novel structure.

  ✓ Fix plot holes and tie up loose ends.

  ✓ Get rid of some characters, combine others, and deepen all of them.

You need to be willing to work hard, to rewrite as many times as you need to get it right. How many revisions? That depends. Some authors report rewriting their novels ten to twenty times — or more. That sounds scary, but authors who do that many rewrites do it because they love to. Many authors also hire freelance editors to help them through the rewriting. Chapter 16 discusses this further.

Stephen King is an SOTP writer. So is Anne Lamott, author of Bird by Bird. So is Jerry Jenkins, who co-wrote the Left Behind series. If you want to write by the seat of your pants, you’re in very good company.

Editing as you go

You may like the wild freedom that seat-of-the-pants writing gives you, but at the same time, you may be terrified of letting the story get away from you. The solution some writers choose is to edit it as they go. Here’s how it works:

1.  Write a scene without planning.

    See chapters 9 and 10 for tips on writing scenes.

  2.  Before you go on, stop and edit it.

  3.  Then edit it again and again, as many times as you need, until the scene glows.

    This is hard work. You may edit it five or ten or twenty times. You may spend an entire day or a whole week working on that one scene.
The benefit of editing as you go is that each time you work over that scene, you understand your story a little better. And your perfectionist heart feels safe when at last you decide to move on to the next scene, secure in the knowledge that the story up to this point works perfectly.
  The hazard of editing as you go is that you’re still just making up the story as you go along. Because you probably don’t know how the story is going to come out and you probably don’t know how you’re going to get there, you may wrestle with the terrible fear that the book actually isn’t going to go anywhere. And your fear may be justified. After all that laborious sanding and buffing and polishing and varnishing of your beautiful scenes, you may have sanded and buffed and polished and varnished your way into a corner that you can’t get out of.
Luckily, you’re a novelist. You are a remarkably creative novelist, with all sorts of desperate and wicked tricks that your subconscious has been hoarding over a lifetime. If your caffeine level is high enough, and if you’re terrified enough, you may just find a new and incredibly cool way out of that corner. That’s the joy and the hysteria of writing fiction, and truth be told, there’s no greater feeling than brilliantly fixing a busted storyline at 3:00 a.m. on the night before your book is due and e-mailing it in to your editor just as she’s getting in to work. There’s also no worse feeling than staring at the screen all night in a white panic, knowing that nothing you can do will fix your story and you’re going to have to grovel for a deadline extension.
Dean Koontz is an edit-as-you-go writer. If this is your creative paradigm of writing, then know that the method works and works exceptionally well in the right hands.

Planning a little, writing a little

Many writers want a bit of the freedom of the seat-of-the-pants writer, but they also want the security of knowing that the story is going to work out. These writers first do some story planning to get the large-scale structure of the story right. They may create backstories for their characters, map out a three-act structure, write a synopsis, create a list of scenes. But they don’t work out every detail in advance. They leave some of that creativity for writing the first draft. Then when they start writing, they’ve already made most of the big decisions. They still have many small decisions to make, but the main strategy of the story works, and they know before they start writing that it’ll work. They’re just fuzzy on the details.
  Randy prefers this style of writing. Years ago, he wrote a short article on his method and made an analogy to a curious mathematical object known as a snowflake fractal. (A fractal is an object that you keep drawing and redrawing in ever-finer detail, but it’s never actually finished.) Although this analogy was initially a joke, the idea caught fire. To Randy’s astonishment, the Snowflake method has become wildly popular around the world, and now hundreds of thousands of people visit the Snowflake page on his Web site (www.advancedfictionwriting.com) every year. You can find a detailed description of the ten steps of the Snowflake method in Chapter 18.
The virtue of the Snowflake method (or any other method in which you do an incomplete design before you start writing) is that you have reasonable confidence that your story is going to get from your chosen beginning to your chosen ending. You’re free to write rapidly, knowing that you probably won’t make any decisions in any given scene that will wreck the main story. You probably won’t introduce any characters who’ll need reworking later.  The hazard of the Snowflake method is that you may think that your incom-plete design is enough to get you home to nirvana. It’s not. Sooner or later, your initial design for your storyline is going to show cracks. If you continue on blindly without stopping to do a redesign, then you’re setting yourself up for massive revisions later.
  If you use the Snowflake method, we recommend that you periodically check your story design to make sure it’s still on track. Has your plot drifted? Have you introduced any new characters who need more airtime? Most importantly, are you forcing your story to go in an unnatural direction?
Randy typically does a complete review of his story design after writing about the first quarter of his novel. He repeats this at the halfway mark and the three-quarters mark. Having the story evolve very strongly away from his original plan isn’t unusual. That’s okay — he finds that the design almost always gets better.

Outlining before you write

Many writers (Peter included) simply can’t write anything until they’ve worked out the whole story. For them, writing a summary of the story first is essential. This summary is typically called a long synopsis or an outline or a treatment or whatever. We call it an outline so as not to confuse it with the synopsis (two or three pages summarizing the story) that most publishers require before they’ll buy a book. A typical outline for a 400-page novel may run 20 to 50 pages or even longer.
Outliners don’t want to waste any first-draft material. They want to know every twist and turn in their story in advance. They want to find all the holes in the story logic and plug them before writing one word of the manuscript. Outliners may do as many as five or ten drafts of their outline before they pronounce it done. Then they whiz through the first draft, knowing that the story is already there and all they have to do is type the words. If they’re good with words, their first draft may be pretty close to their last.The virtue of the outlining method is that working with a 50-page outline is much easier than working with a 500-page manuscript. You can write it ten times faster, edit it ten times faster, and delete big sections without crying over spilled ink. Holding the big chunks of the story in your mind is also much easier when you’re working with an outline than when working with a manuscript. You have less to remember.
  The hazard of outlining is that an outline is essentially oriented toward plot, not toward character. So if you’re a character-oriented writer, then you’ll likely need to augment your outline with some detailed sketches of the characters in your story. If you’re a plot-oriented writer, you may get to know your characters only after you’ve locked them into a story that doesn’t fit them very well. You may find yourself adjusting your characters so they fit the storyline. Whenever you do that, you run the risk of having two-dimensional characters, concocted to fit the story.
Robert Ludlum (The Bourne Identity) was a famous outliner. Some of his outlines reportedly ran longer than 100 pages. If you’re a fan of Ludlum, you know that his plots are enormously complicated, yet he rarely dropped a thread that he didn’t ultimately tie off.

Finding a Creative Paradigm  that Works for You

  There’s no one best way to write a novel that works for everyone. Each writer is unique, with particular strengths and weaknesses. You need to find the creative paradigm that plays to your strengths. If you do, you’ll find that writing fiction is fun (even when it’s hard work). If you choose a paradigm that plays into your weaknesses, you’ll find fiction writing to be a horrible, miserable chore, and you may quit writing.

We provide an overview of four creative paradigms in the preceding section. In this section, we explain why you should think about your writing process, and we help you develop a writing strategy that suits you best.

Understanding why method matters

You may wonder why you need to think about creative paradigms at all. Why not just write? The problem is that “just writing” is a creative paradigm — it’s the seat-of-the-pants method, and it may or may not work for you.Your creative paradigm gives you a way to manage your novel, which is an enormously complex work of art for three reasons:

  ✓ Characters are real people, and real people are complicated. See Chapters 7 and 12 for the gritty details on building deep characters.

✓ A plot has six different layers of detail, and all six layers need to be working correctly in your story. See Chapters 8 through 10 and 13 through 15 for a careful discussion of these six layers.

  ✓ Your novel’s theme must pervade every page of your story, without being visible anywhere. You probably won’t understand your novel’s theme until after your first draft is written. (If your theme is a great one, literary critics in coming centuries will likely argue fiercely that you never understood your theme at all.)

The human mind isn’t well adapted to holding an enormous amount of complexity all at once. Most people can keep no more than about seven different things in their mind at a time. If they need to tackle more than that, they mentally create compartments and shove the extras in those.
The four creative paradigms we discuss in this chapter are four common strategies that novelists use to manage the overwhelming complexity of a novel. When you find the right creative paradigm for you, you’ll have a tremendous competitive advantage as a writer. In our experience, the main reason talented writers fail to finish novels is that they’re using the wrong creative paradigm.

Developing your creative paradigm

  Whether you want to or not, you’re going to choose some sort of creative paradigm to write your novel. The question for you is which method will help you manage the layers of the novel and write the best story you can. In most cases, that will be the method that’s easiest for you, because it plays to your natural strengths. But whether it’s easy or hard, all that matters is that your creative paradigm works better for you than any other method. At the end of the day, nobody is going to know or care how you wrote your novel; all they’ll care about is whether it gives them a powerful emotional experience.Most professional writers find a writing method that works for them early in their careers and stick with it. On the few occasions we’ve seen experienced novelists try to change their creative paradigms, the results have been disas-ter. If you’re a beginner, now is the time for you to look at all the paradigms, try them out, and choose the one that works for you.
Table 4-1 can help you decide which method may be a good fit (we describe these strategies in detail earlier in “Creative Paradigms: Investigating Various Writing Methods”). Try the creative paradigm that sounds most appealing and see whether your work gives the reader a powerful emotional experience (which is the measure of a novel — see Chapter 2 for details). If it does, then stick with what works. If not, then try combining features from the second-most-appealing creative paradigm or come up with your own method. Don’t let anyone tell you that you have to use some particular method of writing your novel.

Table 4-1  Choosing a Creative Paradigm

Question

Do you prefer to plan in advance or plunge right in?

Seat-of-the-Pants

Plunge in.

Edit-As-You-Go

Plunge in.

Snowflake

Plan (rarely plunge in).

Outline

Plan.

Question 

Do you prefer each stage of a project to be perfect before you move on, or is leaving loose ends okay?

Seat-of-the-Pants

Loose ends are okay.

Edit-As-You-Go

Perfect it first.

Snowflake

Loose ends are okay.

Outline

Perfect it first. (you may write an outline with loose ends but clean them up in another draft of the outline before writing).

Question 

Do you hate, tolerate, or enjoy organizing things?

Seat-of-the-Pants

Hate, tolerate, or enjoy

Edit-As-You-Go

Tolerate or enjoy

Snowflake

Tolerate 

Outline

Enjoy

Question 

Are you a linear thinker, or do you like to think up random story ideas and then pull them all together later?

Seat-of-the-Pants

Usually linear (you write the story  in the  order it  happens)

Edit-As-You-Go

Linear 

Snowflake

Linear or random

Outline

Linear or random (you may create scenes at random and then move them around)

Question 

Do you prefer to look at the big picture first and then work out the details, or do you prefer to think about the details first and figure out the big picture later?

Seat-of-the-Pants

Details first

Edit-As-You-Go

Details first

Snowflake

Big picture first

Outline

Usually big  picture first

Using Your Creative Paradigm to Find Your Story Structure

The story structure of a modern novel has six layers of complexity, and you need to manage each layer so that the direction is clear at every stage (see Chapters 8 through 10 and 13 through 15 for details on these layers). Your reader must always know where your characters think the story is going and why; therefore, you must always know where the story is going and why — and how you’ll throw in roadblocks to surprise your characters and your readers. You may not understand this in your first draft, but you need to understand it by the final one.
The problem is that your novel is too complicated for you to figure out all six layers of complexity in one go. You have to take it in stages, first working out one layer of your story structure, then another, and then trying to fit them together bit by bit. This takes a lot of time and effort; fitting them all together on the first try is impossible. This means you need to make several passes through your novel, each time reworking things so the different layers mesh together. You can do this in any order you want, depending on how you  work best.

Each of the creative paradigms we cover in the preceding sections is geared toward putting these various layers of story together, fixing up the mis-matches, reworking the pieces that don’t fit, and then putting them together again, over and over until the story is working on all six layers of story structure. Here’s how the process works for each style:

  ✓ Seat-of-the-pants writing: The seat-of-the-pants method starts with the low-level details. Line by line and paragraph by paragraph, these details work nicely. But at the higher levels of organization — scenes and acts — the story may not work at all. So in the editing stage, you have to rework the whole thing to give those scenes and acts a clear and sensible direction. This is a bottom-up approach.

  ✓ Editing as you go: The edit-as-you-go method likewise starts with the details. But after you’ve written a scene, you go back and edit it, thinking now about how this scene works with all the other scenes. If you need to tweak some of those earlier scenes, this is the time to do it. When the scene is finally perfect, the story as a whole works — up to this point in the story. If everything goes well, at the end of the story, everything is still working well.

  ✓ Snowflaking: The Snowflake method starts with the big picture — usually the main storyline and then the standard three-act structure. Next, you put together a synopsis and then the scenes to fill in the details. If either of these changes the big picture, you edit the storyline and three-act structure. After working back and forth a few times, you’re ready to start writing the first draft. While writing, you keep checking to make sure that the big picture is still working and make changes as necessary to keep  the story on track. At the end of the first draft, the story should be well- structured and should need only minor editing. This is a top-down approach.

  ✓ Outlining: As an outliner, you start with the big picture and work out a storyline and three-act structure. As soon as those work, you create a synopsis and the sequence of scenes. Up to this point, you’ve worked much like the Snowflaker. But now you write a long synopsis instead of a first draft. This long synopsis fills in most of the story ideas, but you tell rather than show each scene. After you finish, if the story works, you go to work on the first draft. At the end of the first draft, you have a well-structured story that needs only minor editing.

MARGINALIA:

Staying out of editing mode

If  you’re  having  trouble  working  in  creative mode without slipping into editing mode, try one of the following tricks to break the habit:

 ✓  Write  your  first  draft  longhand.  Editing handwritten work is a lot harder, so you may be less tempted.

 ✓  Put a cotton ball on your backspace key so you’re reminded not to edit yourself.

 ✓  Challenge yourself to write 500 words as fast  as  you  can  type.  Time  yourself  and  see whether you can do it in less than 15 minutes.

Multiple personalities: Profiling the writer

Everyone knows that all kinds of people are in the world — liberal and conservative, cautious and impetuous, deep and shallow, creative and analytical. If you’ve ever taken a personality test, such as the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, then  you  know  how  many  ways  people  can be  different  —  at  least  in  the  ways  people try  to  label.  In  the  Myers-Briggs  scheme  of things, four elements go into your personality, and  each  one  has  two  main  options:  You’re an Extravert or an Introvert, an Intuitive or a Sensor, a Thinker or a Feeler, and a Judger or a Perceiver. Sixteen different combinations of these traits are possible, and your particular combination says a lot about you.But  surely  writers  are  more  similar  to  one another than to the great unwashed masses of nonwriters, aren’t they? Writers are creative types, generally pretty intelligent, maybe given to angst more than is good for them, but that’s because they’re deep thinkers, right? Writers have so much in common that there’s probably some typical novelist personality, no?
Well,  no.  Randy  attended  a  writing  retreat once with about 80 other published novelists. One  speaker  talked  about  the  Myers-Briggs classification  scheme  and  then  handed  out tests. Randy wondered  whether most of the novelists would end up in just a few of the 16 possible groups. To his surprise, nearly every possible combination of traits had at least one writer in it. Randy is an INTP (introvert-intuitive-thinker-perceiver), but one of his good friends is precisely the opposite — an ESFJ (extravert-sensor-feeler-judger). Peter is an ISFJ (introvert-sensor-feeler-judger) — at least this week.
Intrigued,  Randy  began  talking  to  his  fellow novelists  to  see  which  methods  they  use  to write their fiction. He found that their creative paradigms vary as widely as their personalities. The point? There’s no one writer personality type. Individual writers are very different, and each has his or her own way of approaching the writing process. There’s no right or wrong here — just what’s right for you.

Using creative paradigms for shorter works and screenplays

What  about  other  kinds  of  fiction,  such  as short stories and screenplays? Do you need a creative paradigm for them, too? If so, is it the same one you’d use for a novel?A novel has many characters and six layers of story structure, and managing them all in your brain is extremely hard; you choose your creative paradigm to help you manage all that complexity in a way that’s best for your personality and your brain. So in that light, here’s our take on using creative paradigms with other types of fiction:

 ✓  Short stories: We believe that you’ll probably do fine with your short story, no matter which  creative  paradigm  you  use.  You simply don’t have to manage as much in a short story. A short story has only a few characters and typically has either four or five layers of story structure.

 ✓  Screenplays:  A  screenplay  is  generally 100 or more pages, and it’s much closer in complexity to a novel, both in the number of characters and in the number of layers of story structure. So we believe that you should use the same creative paradigm for writing a screenplay as you’d use for writing a novel.


}
Chapter 5: Managing Your Time . . . and Yourself {

Chapter 5

Managing Your Time

and Yourself

In This Chapter

Creating a writing schedule

Setting up an inspiring writing space

Managing your money

You need three major resources to have a successful writing career: time, writing space, and money. If you’re going to succeed as a novelist, you must use these resources wisely. Throughout your writing career, you’ll want to continuously improve yourself in all three areas, but you have to start somewhere.
In this chapter, we explore all three resources. We start with the resource no one can make any more of: time. Despite rumors to the contrary, there still are only 24 hours in a day, 7 days in a week, and 52 weeks in a year. However, finding the time to write is possible if you carefully and consistently manage your time — and yourself. In this chapter, we also consider the importance  of setting up a good place to do your writing, and we wrap up with a brief  discussion of managing money.

Finding Time to Write

Writing is a time-intensive occupation. Not only that, but writing is a craft that will improve the more time you spend doing it. We can guarantee that if you dedicate time to learning, practicing, and honing your writing craft, you’ll become a better writer. And better writers tend to get published more often — and in higher-quality venues.

If you just want to enjoy writing for writing’s sake, then you really don’t need to worry about setting up a regular schedule or mapping out your day to make time for your writing. However, if you hope to be published — or if you hope to advance your craft and earn better advances or fees from your publishers — then you need to devote a significant amount of time to writing.Establishing and sticking to a writing  goal — for this week and this year
William Faulkner once said, “I write when the spirit moves me, and the spirit moves me every day.” If your ultimate goal is to become a professional nov-elist, then eventually you’ll reach the point where you write every day. But very few writers start out on that kind of schedule. When you’re just starting out, you probably can’t write every day because you have other commitments. But you want to be writing every week — probably at least a couple of times per week. Why? Because you need this time to focus on learning the tools of the craft and improving your writing skills.

  Here’s our advice for setting aside time to write every week:

  1.  Create a specific writing goal.

    In our experience, your best bet is to start small and steadily work up to longer periods of writing time each week. By starting out small, you’ll be able to celebrate smaller and near-term victories on your path to becoming a fiction author. You may start with, say, half an hour or an hour a week. Later, your goal may be to carve out three hours per week of honest writing time or to write five pages of text or 700 words a day. Make sure that whatever goal you choose, it’s both measurable and attainable.

  2.  Write down your goal.

    Research indicates that people who write down their goals have a much better chance of reaching them than people who don’t write them down. Write your goal on a piece of paper taped to your computer monitor or wall, on a to-do list, or within your scheduling software. Your written goal may look something like this: “This week, I’m going to spend an hour writing. In that hour, I’m going to produce 200 words, and I don’t care if they’re the crappiest lines I ever write, but I won’t quit till they’re done.”

  3.  Find the time to work toward your goal.

    If you don’t know where your writing time will come from, list all the optional things you do each week. Make a quick estimate of how many hours you spend on each of the following:

•Watching TV

•Reading magazines or newspapers

•Browsing the Web

•Socializing with friends

•Doing optional activities related to your job, school, family, or church

•Doing other activities for fun

    Some of these activities are likely chewing up anywhere between one and ten hours per week of your time, perhaps more. So here comes the hard part: You need to trade some of these activities for writing time. Start small and allow a few months to wean yourself away from the activities you can do with less — or go entirely without. Maybe for your first week, you commit to watching one hour less TV on Wednesday night.
    Avoid robbing your sleep time to write, and don’t skimp on exercise. Writing is not just a sedentary activity and a solitary activity — it’s a vegetary activity. You can’t afford to fall apart physically, so don’t consider sleep and exercise to be expendable.

  4.  Tell anyone who needs to be informed.

    That may be your spouse, partner, children, parents, co-workers, or dog-catcher. Tell everyone who needs to know so they won’t interrupt you as you work to achieve your goal (and so they don’t wonder why you stopped showing up for weekly moose-calling practice).

  5.  Find someone to hold you accountable for achieving your goal.

    Although you may very well be able to commit to a goal and follow through to achieve it, having someone else (a friend, work associate, spouse, or significant other) hold you accountable can keep you motivated. Give this person a copy of your goal and ask your supporter to check in with you periodically to see whether you’re meeting your promises. Consider setting up a system in which you promise to pay some sort of fine for failing to achieve your goal. The fine should not be a mere token — it should be stiff enough that you’ll do whatever it takes to hit your target.
    Randy had a writing buddy once who made this deal: Any week he failed to hit his writing quota, he had to pay 50 dollars. Randy’s buddy was just out of graduate school and working at a low-paying job, and 50 bucks hurt. He rarely missed his quota. Guess what? When Randy recently talked with him on the phone, this buddy was raving about the gorgeous cover his publisher had just sent him for his sixth novel.

After you’ve been writing for a month or so at a steady pace of an hour a week, bump up the pace a little — to two hours a week. We recommend that in their first year of writing, beginning writers ramp up to about five hours of writing per week. More-experienced writers generally devote at least 20 hours a week to their writing, with professional writers often working much more.Go through the same routine each time: Reset your goal and write it down. Decide what you can cut out of your life to gain the time you need. Inform those who must be informed about your new goal. Finally, make yourself accountable to someone who can exact a penalty if you fail to reach your goal.
Be consistent and keep at your schedule, but don’t beat yourself up if you miss a week. Just make an effort to get back to writing the next week. No matter how busy you are, you can squeeze in time to write by examining how you spend your free time and identifying some of that time to repurpose. You’re already using up that time — just use it differently.
  If you do this, you will improve as a writer. Practice really does make perfect, and this is your primary goal — to become a better writer. The more you write, the better you’ll get. 

Organizing your time

There’s an old saying: if you don’t manage your time, your time will manage you. One of the best ways to take control of your schedule is to break your day into blocks of time, with each block devoted to a specific purpose. For example, the first time block in your day (after eating breakfast and taking a shower) may be devoted to reading and responding to e-mail. The second block may be devoted to a library trip to do research or to actual focused writing time. You need to decide how long each block of time will be and which tasks will go within each block.
  Schedule your writing block for whatever time of day works best for you — try a variety of times to see when you’re most energized, focused, and inspired.An almost endless variety of activities competes for every writer’s attention — anything from taking out the trash to returning phone calls to reading existing books in your genre to attending your friend’s soccer game. Making a priority list can ensure that non-writing tasks don’t pilfer your writing time. A priority (or to-do) list helps you determine which tasks you’ll do each day and in which order you’ll do them. Peter has a spiral notebook specifically for such lists.  The idea of a priority list is to keep your most important tasks front and center during the course of your workday — not to have a laundry list of everything you may do within the next year. Make your active list of priorities no more than seven to ten items long. Describe each task in detail in order of importance. As you complete tasks, delete or cross them off.

Review your list at the beginning of each day to get a feel for what you’ll be doing and in what order you’ll be doing it. Make any changes you need to bring the list up to date. Are any tasks missing? Or do you see tasks that are no longer relevant and should be removed? Is the order correct? Has one of the tasks become more important than another? Keep your list focused and current, and be sure to use it.
  Try to avoid the temptation to skip to easier — but less important — tasks. Why? Because then you’ll never get around to your most-important, highest-priority tasks. That said, if you find yourself stuck on a high-priority task and you just can’t seem to find the inspiration to get it moving, then move down the list to your next-highest priority. By successfully completing your next task, you may build the momentum you need to carry you through the top of your priority list.

Setting Up Your Ideal Writing Space

Why do you need a creative space for your writing? Can’t you just go to a coffee shop and plunk down your laptop? Yes, of course you can. In that case, the coffee shop is part of your writing space. But another part is that laptop. Every writing space has three basic parts:

✓ A desk (or table or other flat surface)

✓ A chair

✓ A computer (or pad of paper and pen or pencil)

If you mooch off the coffee shop for the table and chair, that’s perfectly okay, as long as the owners don’t mind. (Good luck at mooching a computer off them, though.)
  Whoever provides the space, make sure that it’s dedicated to your writing. All people are creatures of habit. Being creative is easier when you have a special space where you habitually get creative.

Securing the best writing surface

Every writer needs something to write on. Although a pad of paper or laptop computer balanced on your knees may work for short bursts of writing inspiration, you probably need a comfortable and solid surface on which to write for longer periods of time. For most people, this surface is a desk or table. Make sure your desk or table is at an appropriate height — not too high, not too low. (Ergonomics experts usually tell you to keep your wrists in a straight, neutral position while you type, so that determines what “too high” and “too low” mean.) If space is at a premium in your home, condo, or apartment, then a dining room table can make for an excellent writing surface. If you have room in your home for a proper desk, then be sure that it contains drawers or cubbies for storage and that it’s built well enough to last you for more than just a few months.
  If space is really at a premium for you — maybe you live in a studio apartment or you share space with several other people — then a wide variety of specialized writing surfaces are available. Consider buying and installing a fold-down desk that you can mount on the wall. These items are designed to be ready at moment’s notice when you need them but to stay out of the way when you don’t. Alternatively, consider getting a laptop writing table — also known as a lap desk. These writing surfaces are easy to handle, and you can take them anywhere.

Finding the right chair

If you’ve ever worked an office job, you know just how important your chair is to maintaining your comfort while sitting for long periods of time. And believe us: Writers tend to do a lot of sitting. Here are some things to look for when you buy, beg, or borrow your next chair:

✓ Good upper and lower back support

  ✓ An adjustable backrest

  ✓ A comfortable seat cushion

  ✓ Ample room around your hips and thighs

  ✓ Adjustable padded armrests

  ✓ A five-point base with casters

Choosing a computer (if you  want to use one)

Many writers today use computers to do all their writing, and for them, com-puters are where it’s at. So why use a computer? Computers allow you to do the following:

  ✓ Easily make changes and corrections to your document

  ✓ Keep track of word count

  ✓ Convert your manuscript into a file that you can quickly and easily send to anyone around the world via e-mail

  ✓ Do online research

  ✓ Easily insert graphics and photographs into your text (this is rare for the actual text of your novel, but common when you’re doing research or brainstorming your characters)

  ✓ Store and transport thousands of pages of text on a very small memory stick or thumb drive

Not every writer uses a computer to compose novels, short stories, or other fictional works. More than a few writers find that writing by hand — using a pen or pencil and paper — or even using an old-fashioned typewriter is an essential part of the way they write. If that’s the case for you, then that’s great — do whatever works best to inspire your creative muse. But no matter how good your handwriting is, you’ll need a typed version of your manu-script to submit to your agent or bring to writing conferences. If you don’t plan to hire a typist, a computer is most likely in your future.Fortunately for writers, today’s computers are fast, capable, and surprisingly affordable. Here are some features to consider:

  ✓ If you plan to take your computer with you — essential if you plan to do your writing outside of your home — then get a laptop. If you plan to do all your writing at home or in an office, then a desktop computer may be the right choice for you.

✓ If you get a desktop machine, get as large of a monitor as you can reasonably afford. You don’t want to have to squint to see your beautiful text on the screen. Most laptop screens are much smaller than desktop monitors, so if you get a laptop you are trading portability for visibility. However, you can often plug in your laptop to a larger monitor on your desk to get the best of both worlds.

  ✓ Invest in good word processing software. Microsoft Word is the most common choice for professional writers. If you hate all things Microsoft, then make sure that your word processor can read and write files in Microsoft Word format. The free OpenOffice suite of software includes a word processor named Writer that many writers prefer over Word. (See www.openoffice.org to download this free software or browse the web to see if you can find a suitable alternative.)

  ✓ Get networked. A connection to the Internet — wireless in the case of a laptop computer — is almost mandatory so you can do research and fact checking on the fly (or if you just want to take a break and check your e-mail).

Here are some things you don’t need to worry about anymore:

  ✓ Speed and storage. All modern computers are plenty fast enough and have far more than enough memory and storage for your needs.

  ✓ Mac versus Windows versus Linux. Any of these operating systems will do just fine. Use whichever you like. Randy writes on a Mac. Peter writes on a Windows machine. We trade files back and forth with absolutely no compatibility problems, and we don’t even know what our editors use. Nobody cares anymore what kind of system you work on.

Putting everything in place

Before you dive into the writing process, get your writing space set up to write. If you’re trying to write on a desk that’s cluttered with dirty clothes or piles of old newspapers or other debris, you won’t be at your best as a writer. Clear off anything that doesn’t have something to do with achieving your writing goals.
Put your computer front and center, with the keyboard and monitor in a comfortable place — not hanging off the edge of the desk. Locate your printer nearby (so you don’t have to get up every time you print a document), and have a little cup to hold pencils and pens within easy reach. Although many writers now use online dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other references, you may find it useful to have a dictionary and other reference books on your desk.

Find your own writing space. Make it yours. Make it special. If possible, reserve it only for writing and only for you. You need this creative space. Take it, guard it, and keep it.

Dealing with Distractions

Wherever you choose to write — whether at home, in a park, or at your local coffeehouse — you soon find that many distractions are available to entice you away from your writing time. Although the occasional distraction can be a good thing (it can get you out of a rut or give you a fresh perspective on your work), ongoing distractions that keep you from writing won’t help you get published — or finished. Here are a few tips for dealing with distractions:

  ✓ Reward yourself for achieving your goals. Goals may include writing a certain number of pages or words, devoting a certain number of hours to writing each week, or submitting your manuscript to an agent or publisher (see the earlier section “Establishing and sticking to a writing goal — for this week and this year”). When you reward yourself for achieving your goals, you’ll be even more motivated to stay on track. The best rewards are ones that you personally find motivating, and they may include things such as treating yourself to lunch at a local restaurant, watching TV for a bit, or taking time to scoop yourself a bowl of ice cream.

✓ Put up a do-not-disturb sign. If you have a posse of wild kids or distracting significant others vying for your time, create clear boundaries for your writing space and time. Then announce them to the important people in your life and ask their cooperation and support. Be polite but firm in enforcing the rules — and your boundaries. If, for example, your visiting mother-in-law keeps bothering you to chat, politely explain that you’ll be happy to chat after you finish your writing but that she’ll need to wait until you’re done. It’s best if you can schedule time for friends and family, so they don’t feel like they’re competing with your writing.
   Understand that you may have to be flexible. If you’re a single parent with kids to entertain and take care of, then you may find that you need to attend to them during the day and work on your writing at night, when they’re fast asleep.

  ✓ Unplug, turn off, or move the distractions. Perhaps you can get rid of the distractions that are keeping you from achieving your writing goals. If the television in your writing space keeps calling your name, then move it into another room. If a constant barrage of e-mail messages on your computer keeps you from focusing on writing, close your e-mail program. If a friend calls and wants to talk your ear off, then you may decide that you’ll let voice-mail pick up calls when you’re working. Writing is a job, so treat it like one.

  ✓ Take a short break. Regular breaks help you clear your mind and then get back to work with a renewed energy and focus. We suggest that you take a break every 60 to 90 minutes and that your breaks last no longer than about five minutes. This will help ensure that you don’t lose your precious writing momentum.
   Randy likes to walk. Every hour or two, if the weather’s good, he takes a five-minute walk around the pond on his property. If the weather’s foul, he hits the elliptical machine in his living room for a few minutes. Either way, it boosts his energy levels. Then he drinks a glass of water, looks outside at the ducks on the pond, and has a deep conversation with his cat. For the occasional energy boost, Peter grabs the electric guitar sitting in his home office, plugs it in, and rocks out for a few minutes. And when he really needs a boost, he fires up his espresso machine. 

Looking at Money Matters

J. K. Rowling became the richest author in the UK (and perhaps in the world) through her massively popular Harry Potter series. Did you know that she was a single mom on welfare when she wrote the first Harry Potter book? Tom Clancy quit his day job selling life insurance after his first novel The Hunt for Red October became a runaway bestseller. John Grisham quit his job lawyering after The Firm made him a superstar.

Although the lives of some very successful novelists make for a great rags-to-riches story, the vast majority of writers don’t make a full-time living from it. For many writers, writing fiction is not about making a lot of money. Instead, the satisfaction comes in finding someone who thinks their work is good enough to merit being published in a magazine, e-zine, journal, or book and in having people read their work and enjoy it enough to recommend to their friends and family.
However, many writers do try to make a living — or at least some occasional mad money — from their craft. If that’s your hope, then you need a strategy. And even if you consider writing a hobby, you still need to budget money for writing. In this section, we take a close look at why money matters — and what you can do about it.

Budgeting money for writing

Ideas may be free, but writing them down isn’t. As a writer, you’re going to incur some expenses over the next several years, even though you won’t have any income from your writing to offset them. What are those expenses? We can list several possibilities here:

  ✓ Computer, printer, and Internet access

  ✓ A desk and chair and various office supplies (a few crates of paper for that printer aren’t cheap!)

  ✓ Books for research, both novels in your genre and nonfiction (the books unavailable at your library or those you prefer to own)

  ✓ Field trips, road trips, museum admission, or any other ways you want to do research that don’t involve cracking open a book

  ✓ Writing classes and workshops

  ✓ Writing conferences (including registration and travel expenses)

  ✓ Membership dues for any writing associations you join

  ✓ Dinner for your star critique buddy, the person who ensures that you stick to your writing schedule, and your best supporters as you write

You may already have bought some of these items. Most people already have a computer and printer before they start writing. If you don’t already have a decent desk and chair, however, you need one. You don’t want to end up with a back shaped like a pretzel and a chiropractor’s bill that costs several times more than that decent desk and chair would’ve cost in the first place.

You should seriously think about budgeting money for writing conferences now. Quite simply, writing conferences are the quickest and easiest way to make the connections you need to sell your book. This makes them an essential expense — one you can’t ignore.
  Randy sold his first three books through the contacts he made at writing conferences. After he sold his third book, an agent friend of his called to see whether Randy thought it was about time to start working with an agent. 
Where did Randy meet this agent? That’s right — at a writing conference.
Writing conferences are wonderful, but they do cost money. Even a small, regional one-day conference takes at least $100 out of your pocket. And the larger national multi-day conferences can run you more than $1,000. Start saving money now for writing conferences so that you’ll have the money when you’re ready. If you take your writing career seriously and follow the recommendations in this book, you may be ready a lot sooner than you think.

Making your living as a writer: Don’t expect this to be your day job (yet)

We’ve heard it said that the top-five-earning writers in the world earn about 60 percent of all the dollars earned by writers. This isn’t easy to verify, but our experience tells us it’s plausible. The pie is split up into a very few huge slices and a lot of tiny slices. Of all the books in print in any given year — about 1.2 million titles — only about 25,000 of them sell more than 5,000 copies during that year. Only a few hundred of those titles sell more than 100,000 copies. According to Publisher’s Weekly magazine, the average book in America sells about 500 copies.
Long story short, few writers sell enough books to earn a part-time, much less a full-time, living from their craft. However, if your hope is to become a full-time writer earning a full-time paycheck from your work, then you should consider both sides of the equation. On one hand, you need to bring in enough good-paying book deals to keep your financial ship of state afloat. On the other hand, you need to cut your living expenses to allow you to survive on less — giving you the time you need to write.

Can you live on less? If so, how much less? We have two reasons for asking:

  ✓ The less you can live on, the easier you’ll find it to earn your entire income from writing.

  ✓ If you start living on less right now, then you can bank the difference and build yourself a buffer so you can quit your day job sooner.

Look at your own finances — and the finances of your family — right now. Got them in front of you? Good. Now ask yourself these questions:

  ✓ How much do you earn each month?

  ✓ How much do you spend each month?

  ✓ How much do you save each month?

  ✓ Can you cut your spending and increase your saving? If, for example, you have a mortgage or other large debts, can you pay those down so that your fixed expenses are less?

  It’s important to remember that you get paid in irregularly-spaced lump sums for your writing. A typical contract will specify that you get a fraction of your advance on signing, another fraction at various milestones, and the rest when the publisher agrees that you’ve submitted a manuscript of satisfactory quality. Some contracts even delay part of the advance until the publication date. Many books don’t earn out their advance, which means that you never get paid another dime on those books, after the initial advance. Novelists simply don’t get paid on a nice, weekly schedule. This means you need to manage your cash flow well (unless you’re independently wealthy or you have somebody who supports you monetarily in your writing).
  Our advice is to make sure you keep your day job until you get your fiction-writing empire fully up and running. If you can’t cut expenses significantly, you’re going to need the steady income you’re already receiving each month to keep afloat and to prosper. Believe us: Worrying about where that next dollar is going to come from (and when it’s going to arrive) is an extremely distracting place to be for any writer. You don’t need the pressure of money interfering with your writing — there are plenty of distractions already.

MARGINALIA:

Looking at time management tools

A number of tools are available to make time management a snap, including the following:

 ✓  Personal  organizers  and  day  planners: These  paper-based  time  management  systems — which go by names such as Filofax, Day-Timer, and the FranklinCovey Day Planner — are essentially daily cal-endars on steroids. They’re portable, easy to  use  and  update,  and  they  don’t  need  batteries.

 ✓  Portable  electronic  organizers:  Many mobile  telephones  and  personal  digital assistants (PDAs) incorporate time management utilities within them. For example, Apple’s  iPhone  offers  a  variety  of  time  management  apps,  with  such  titles  as To-Do’s,  iProcrastinate  Mobile,  and Toodledo.

 ✓  Computer software: Microsoft and Apple include simple to-do lists in many of their software offerings (such as Outlook), and you can Google time management software to find all sorts of other options. Remember to keep it simple — few writers need the capabilities in a full-blown project management software package. Ideally, whatever software solution you choose will boot up along  with  your  computer  each  morning and display your list of to-dos without your having to go out of your way to get it going.
Find a simple system that does what you need it to do and — perhaps most importantly — that you’ll use.

Our own creative spaces

Randy’s  creative  space  has  always  been  a large metal office desk with a good ergonomic chair and a computer. For years, that desk was in a corner of the family room, 3 feet from the door where his kids ran in and out all day. But it was Randy’s space. He wrote hundreds of thousands of words in that space. He won a fistful of awards in that space. That space represented writing to Randy.
These days, Randy has an actual office with a door that closes and two large filing cabinets and three enormous bookcases. But the desk and chair and computer are still the same. It’s still his sacred space for writing.
Peter  used  to  do  a  lot  of  his  writing  late  at night in noisy coffeehouses. In fact, his first few books were all scribbled onto big yellow legal pads that smelled strongly of coffee and cigarette smoke. Something about the swirl of people talking and music playing and the sights and smells of molten caffeine and smoldering smokes flipped his creativity switch.Today Peter has a home office that’s separated from the main living space of his home. He has a large desk and computer and a couple of large windows that let in lots of natural light.



}

--Part II: Creating Compelling Fiction
Chapter 6: Building Your Story World: The Setting for Your Story {

Part II

Creating Compelling Fiction

In this part . . .
If you’re going to write fiction, then create compelling fiction — tell a story that touches a deep emotional chord within your readers. In this part, we explore building your story world — the story’s setting — and creating  characters who are real and interesting. We then look at the layers of plot, including story structure (the top layers), synopsis and scene (the middle layers), and action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, description, flashback, and narrative summary (the lowest layer). We put the icing on this part with a look at how to think through your theme.

Chapter 6

Building Your Story World:  The Setting for Your Story

In This Chapter

Examining the three elements of your story world

Creating a physical world

Deciding what drives your people groups

Setting up a world of conflict

Researching and selling your story world


Every novel takes place in its own universe, which you create. This universe is not a fragment of some larger universe; it’s the whole shebang. Because of that, we prefer the term story world rather than smaller-scale terms such as setting or milieu.
  You are the god of the story world you create, and you have complete control over everything that happens there. But this doesn’t mean that just anything can happen in your story world. Your story world needs to have an inner logic that drives it.
For starters, the world must have physics, chemistry, geology, meteorology, biology — in other words, you can’t ignore scientific laws (even if you’ve made up some of those laws yourself). To this, you have to add one or more cultural groups, each with rules that define how the characters can interact. And no matter what kind of story world you work with, it must be capable of having a conflict, because without conflict, you have no story. A perfect world is useless to the fiction writer. Your story world requires both good and evil, and you’re responsible for creating both in a way that ensures that it’s possible for either to win.

Feeling daunted? Shrug it off! You’ve lived in a story world all your life, and you have a deep intuition for what makes it tick. In this chapter, we help you take apart what you already know and see which pieces are core to telling a story. We also help you research the details of your story world so you can bring it to life.
Note that you have to work much harder on your story world in some categories than others. If you’re writing a novel about your hometown, set in the current day, then you don’t need to do much work to create your story world. But some kinds of fiction — notably science fiction, fantasy, and his-torical fiction — require you to imagine a story world that may be very different from yours. Even if your category allows you to pay less attention to story world, remember that looking at your own world in a new way can give you new insights.

Identifying the Parts of a Story World

Every story world has three essential components. Without each of these three components, you simply can’t have a story:

  ✓ The natural world: When you describe the natural world, you create a sense of place. The natural world includes everything there is to know about the physical environment. Normally you don’t mess with the laws of physics or chemistry in your novel, but you do have to know the geography, typical weather patterns, and a thousand other details (some of which we cover later in “Researching Your Story World”).

  ✓ The cultural groups: If your novel is set in a small town, you may have only one cultural group. If it’s in New York City, you may have charac-ters from five or six ethnic groups interacting (and misunderstanding each other). If you’re writing about the planet Zorba, you may have a dozen intelligent species.

  ✓ The backdrop for conflict: This is the political or cultural or religious or interpersonal climate that makes it possible for your story to have conflict. Without conflict, you have no story.

Table 6-1 shows how these building blocks come into play in three novels.

Table 6-1  Elements of Story World in Three Novels

Novel 

The Chosen, by Chaim Potok

Natural World 

Brooklyn during the 1940s

Cultural Groups 

A community of Hasidic Jews, the surrounding community of more-liberal Jews, and the broader world of Gentiles

Backdrop

Religious: The Hasidic community intends to raise its children in a tightly cloistered community sheltered from worldly ideas. But in America, you can’t prevent children from listening to the radio, reading the newspaper, or visiting the library.

Novel 

The Clan of the Cave Bear, by Jean Auel

Natural World 

Ice Age Europe in the vicinity of the Black Sea

Cultural Groups 

Humans and Neanderthals

Backdrop

Cultural: Natural tension occurs between two cultures that don’t understand or trust each other.

Novel 

Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker, by George Lucas

Natural World 

“A galaxy far, far away”

Cultural Groups 

Humans, droids, Wookies, and numerous other species

Backdrop

Political: The Rebel Alliance threatens the repressive Galactic Empire.

Creating a Sense of Place

As a fiction writer, your goal is to create a story world that comes fully alive in your reader’s mind. This is called creating a sense of place, and it’s difficult because you have a limited number of words. The average novel is a bit less than 100,000 words, and you need most of those words for telling your story, not for describing your story world.
This means that you can’t waste a single word. (If a picture is worth 1,000 words, a 100,000-word novel can show your readers only 100 pictures, which would make a pretty lame story.) You have to do better than that, and this section explains how.

Making description do double duty

In the 19th century, authors routinely took a page or three to describe every little detail of the story world. Look at the opening paragraph from Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ, by Lew Wallace. Published in 1880, it was the best-selling American novel of the 19th century:
The Jebel es Zubleh is a mountain fifty miles and more in length, and so narrow that its tracery on the map gives it a likeness to a caterpillar crawling from the south to the north. Standing on its red-and-white cliffs, and looking off under the path of the rising sun, one sees only the Desert of Arabia, where the east winds, so hateful to the vine-growers of Jericho, have kept their playgrounds since the beginning. Its feet are well covered by sands tossed from the Euphrates, there to lie; for the mountain is a wall to the pasture-lands of Moab and Ammon on the west — lands which else had been of the desert a part.
This is static description, which is a lot like a still-life painting. Nothing is hap-pening here. You see no characters, no motion, no feeling. It’s pure geography.
  Nineteenth-century readers loved static descriptions of the setting because descriptions created pictures in their minds, and pictures were rare in the 19th century. Don’t write for those readers. Every one of those readers is now dead, and they aren’t going to buy your book. You’re writing to entertain a reader of the 21st century — one who has seen hundreds or thousands of movies and wants things to happen now. You can’t afford to bore your reader with a long, rambling static description of a mountain, a street, a palace, or anything else.
In Chapter 2, we talk about the seven basic tools you have to deliver the goods to your reader. Five of these unfold in your reader’s mind like a movie — action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, and description of sensory inputs (as seen through the eyes of some character in the scene). When you use only these five tools to write a segment of your story, you can say that the segment is written in immediate scene. Immediate scene has no narrative summary and no static description. Modern fiction writers tend to use more immediate scene and less static description or narrative summary, because modern readers tend to prefer it.
  When you describe any place, any person, any thing in your story, do your best to make that description do double duty. It should do the following:

  ✓ Give the reader a powerful emotional experience.

  ✓ Keep the story moving by integrating smoothly with the action, dialogue, interior monologue, and interior emotion.

Fitting description in the story

  If you can, weave your description in as sensory input with the other immediate-scene parts of your story — the action, dialogue, interior monologue, and interior emotion. Those are the parts of your story that unroll second by second in your reader’s mind. You can’t afford to stop the action for a page while you describe some piece of your story world. If you can’t describe something naturally within the action of the story, and if you can’t describe it from within the mind of one of your characters, then ask yourself why you need to describe it at all.
Do you really need to describe that volcano in pixel-perfect detail? Maybe, if your character is a worried mother who’s racing up the trail alongside the red-hot lava field looking for her lost 5-year-old. Maybe, if your character is a young virgin being forced up the stony path to be sacrificed to the gods in the mountain. Maybe, if your character is trudging up the mountain bearing the Ring of Power and searching for the Cracks of Doom. In any of a thousand similar scenes, go ahead and show that volcano. Make your reader’s eyes burn with the sulfuric wisps. Make her sweat in the blast-furnace heat. Ripple your reader’s stomach with the subsonic rumble of the mountain’s innards.
But maybe the volcano plays no immediate role in your scene. The immediate item of interest may instead be the rare and immensely valuable butterfly flitting from flower to tree at the base of the volcano. It may be the Lamborghini speeding through the visitor center parking lot, with six police cars in blue-and-red flashing pursuit. It may be a laptop with the secrets of a Fortune 500 company on its hard drive, ready to be stolen while lying on a bench in that parking lot while its owner looks through his binoculars at the view. In these cases, don’t show your reader the volcano. Show the butterfly, the Lamborghini, the laptop. Show them in action, from the point of view of a character who cares about them. If your character cares, your reader will, too.
  If you have no story reason to describe something, don’t. If you have a reason, then describe it, but make the description personal — connect to the senses and emotions of one of the characters. The right description, as seen through the eyes of the right character, can conjure up a place, a time, and a mood in your reader.
  Before you write a segment of static description, divorced from any character, ask yourself this first: Are you willing to pay a fine for using static description? (A suitable fine is whatever you earn for one hour of work.) If you’re willing to pay that much to achieve the effect you want using static description, then do so. Otherwise, work it in as sensory description as seen by one of the characters, integrated with action, dialogue, interior monologue, and interior emotion. Chapter 10 explains this concept in more detail.

Weaving emotive force  into your descriptions

  Everything in your story world has one of three basic meanings to each character: good, bad, or neutral. Most of the time, most of your story world will be neutral for your character — so skip the description, unless one of the following applies:

  ✓ You absolutely must describe something in order to move the story forward.

  ✓ You need to set up something that will be important later on.

For example, suppose there’s a vacant house on the corner of the street where your character Travis lives. Travis walks by that house every day to catch the bus to work, and that house means absolutely nothing to him. The house is neutral to Travis. So give the house a passing mention if it’ll become important later — tell readers that it exists — but don’t waste a word describing it. If Travis ever needs to go into that house, then describe it.
However, maybe Travis’s wife Krista kissed her first boyfriend on the porch of that house. For Krista, the rose bush in front of the house carries memo-ries of first love. The house is good to Krista. When she wanders by that house, you may choose to describe it through her eyes, using words that evoke that love. Focus on the fragrance of the red roses, the warm shimmer of sunlight on the windows, the linked hearts rough-carved into the tree beside the porch. When you do that, you’re not just describing the house; you’re also showing Krista’s heart.
Perhaps Jakey, the 10-year-old son of Travis and Krista, believes the house is haunted. Ghosts linger in that house for Jakey, and he’s terrified of walking past it after dark. The house is bad for Jakey. When he races past it at midnight, describe it through his eyes using words that evoke terror. Show the dark windows staring out at the street like the eyeholes of a skull. Hear the wind chuffing through the tree, hissing demonic threats. Again, you’re not merely describing the house; you’re giving your reader emotive hits. That’s why your reader reads.
  Ruthlessly prune your descriptions so that they create an emotional reaction in your characters, but don’t stand still to do so. Show your reader a movie, using the five components of immediate scene. Use concrete details that evoke your character’s senses.

Deciding What Drives Your Cultural Groups

Each of your characters is a unique individual with wants and needs. Chapter 7 details how you create compelling characters as individuals. However, every individual comes from a larger community — a cultural group — with a shared history, language, science, technology, religion, mythology, purpose, and much more. All these things determine what’s likely and what’s possible for your characters. We call these things cultural drivers because they drive your cultural groups in many ways.
Later, in “Researching Your Story World,” we talk about the research you need to do to fully understand your cultural drivers. How much of that research should you show to your reader? The answer depends on the cat-egory of fiction you’re writing. Historical novels, fantasies, and science fiction novels typically show the reader a more complete picture of cultural drivers. Other categories may show less. You should show your reader as much as she’s expecting.
  Don’t spend time describing the cultural background unless it means something to one of the characters. If any of the cultural drivers is important to one of your characters — enough to affect the storyline — then by all means, tell your reader about that cultural driver. As with description, though, you need to find a way to explain it to your reader so as to

  ✓ Give the reader a powerful emotional experience.

  ✓ Keep the story moving, using action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, and sensory description.

Revealing cultural drivers with immediate scene

Most cultural drivers aren’t easy to show in action, and thoughts or speech that describes them may seem unnatural, which creates a major challenge for a writer. Consider a cultural driver that lies at the core of Tom Clancy’s novel Patriot Games: the clash between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland. How would you explain this conflict to someone who knows nothing about Ireland or the history of Western Christianity?

You could show part of it using action, as Clancy does, with a violent terrorist attack on the royal family in London. It’s easy to show action that’s a result of a cultural driver. It’s much harder to explain the reasons for that cultural driver in the first place. Why so much hate? No gunfire scenes can explain that. To explain something so complex, you need words, which means you need either dialogue or interior monologue.The problem with using dialogue is that people just don’t talk about things that everybody knows. Irish Catholics don’t waste time rehearsing for each other the ancient causes of their conflict with Protestants.
  If you’re going to put in some explanation of a cultural driver in dialogue, you need an outsider character (or a child) who doesn’t understand the culture. These characters can believably ask all the questions your reader is asking. If you can’t use an outsider or child, then you can feed information to the reader in tiny little slivers of dialogue, leaving it to the reader to fill in the gaps.You do have another option: interior monologue. But this is even tougher than dialogue, because people rarely spend much time explaining things they already know to themselves. Again, you can show snippets of interior mono-logue to your reader and trust your reader to be smart enough to put the pieces together.

Exposition: Explaining cultural drivers through narrative summary

Why not use narrative summary to explain cultural drivers to your reader? Narrative summary is efficient, and it may be your only choice for explaining a particularly complex cultural driver, but narrative summary is often boring. You just can’t afford to stop the story to deliver a three-page lecture on the history of Scotland under British rule, or the declensions of Russian nouns, or how the tango differs from the polka, or the search by physicists for the Higgs boson, or the intricacies of Zen Buddhism, or what Manifest Destiny meant to an American in 1882.
If you use narrative summary, do your best to keep it short and interesting. Be entertaining. Be brilliant. Be scintillating. For details on narrative summary, flip to Chapter 10.

Combining various elements  to show cultural drivers

If giving readers an info dump isn’t an option for describing social forces, what’s a writer to do? That’s what makes writing fiction a battle — and you need to choose your battles carefully. Is there a sound story reason to explain a certain cultural driver? If not, then consider skipping it.
  If you do have a good story reason to show a cultural driver, then your best strategy is to mix and match all the tools at your disposal. Use a combination of action, dialogue, and interior monologue to show your reader little snippets of your cultural driver. Then firm it all up with pieces of narrative sum-mary, using as little as necessary. This is a major part of the art of fiction, and nobody ever perfects it.
Chapters 10 and 15 go into detail on how to weave all these components into compelling fiction.

Choosing the Backdrop for Conflict

Your story begins when change begins. That raises a question: Change from what, exactly? The answer is change from the status quo. Your responsibility is to know what that status quo is and to communicate it clearly to your reader, along with why the change is happening now. Here’s the key question to ask: What weakness in the system makes it possible for change now, rather than last month or last year? Read on for information on creating a backdrop.

Defining your backdrop

We use the word backdrop to refer to the context for change that marks the beginning of your story. Backdrop has two pieces:

  ✓ The status quo — the way things are

  ✓ The weak point that makes things ripe for change

You have plenty of options for creating a backdrop. Here are some of the most common scenarios for stories, along with their backdrops. If your story is about change in a city, nation, or world, as in Table 6-2, then the backdrop must include some of the history of that city, nation, or world.

Table 6-2  Common Story Backdrops for Social Change

Scenario 

War is beginning 

Status Quo 

Peace 

Weak Point

Whatever problem between the nations leads them to decide that the best solution is to fight it out — has some natural resource such as water or oil run dangerously low? Has one nation developed a new weapon? Has one side signed an alliance with a third country?

Scenario 

War is ending 

Status Quo 

War 

Weak Point

One of the sides has become so badly weakened that it now has to sue for peace

Scenario 

War is reaching a turning point

Status Quo

War 

Weak Point

Typically some tactical situation that one of the sides can exploit to change the direction of the war; a suddenly vulnerable bridge, mountain pass, supply line, or munitions factory all make prime tactical targets.

Scenario 

Cultural change is in the air

Status Quo 

Life as it’s always been 

Weak Point

Almost anything that make the society vulnerable to cultural changes — new technology, immigration of a foreign culture, new ideas, even an explosive new novel

Scenario 

A natural disaster threatens a community or nation

Status Quo 

Life as it’s always been 

Weak Point

Merely that the community or nation is unprepared for this particular type of disaster; whether it’s a tidal wave or hurricane or earthquake, it’s going to massively interrupt ordinary life

Table 6-3 describes some backdrops for stories that focus on personal change. If your story is about personal change, then the backdrop is mostly the backstory of one or a few characters. But even in these highly personal kinds of stories, the story world is still important. For example, in a story world that tolerates no wife-beating, a battered-wife story couldn’t happen; in a story world that assumes wife-beating as normal life, the battered woman’s options would be severely limited. Similarly, the larger story world sets the parameters on what sort of personal goals a character can set.

Table 6-3  Common Story Backdrops for Personal Change

Scenario 

A person decides to change his life for the better

Status Quo 

“My ordinary or boring or wretched life”

Weak Point

“I can’t live like this any longer” — a wife may decide she’s been battered for the last time; an alcoholic may hit the proverbial bottom; a factory worker may realize he can’t face the time clock one more day

Scenario 

A person attempts to achieve some personal goal

Status Quo 

“My life until now” 

Weak Point

“I’m now ready to achieve something new” — a college student who graduates may set a new goal to get a Ph.D.; a runner who’s never raced longer than a 10K may set a new goal to finish a marathon

Scenario 

A person decides to get something he wants

Status Quo 

“My set of personal possessions”

Weak Point

“I now know that I can’t live without having this one great thing” — whether it’s a new computer, a new car, or the lost Ark of the Covenant, when a character decides that he won’t stop until he gets it, any reader is going to want two questions answered: Why this thing? Why now?

Scenario 

A person is threatened by a change for the worse

Status Quo 

“My safe life” 

Weak Point

“I’m unprepared for this change that’s come into my life” — a layoff, some new and unruly neighbors, or an unexpected divorce can smack into your character from out of the blue

You get to choose the history of your character or cultural group. You get to decide what weak point makes change possible. You get to decide which particular event marks the beginning of change. Then you need to explain it all to your reader, using the tools we talk about earlier for showing cultural drivers: mainly dialogue and narrative summary. In showing the history of a person, you have one extra primary tool you can use: flashback. We describe these tools in Chapter 2, and we show techniques for using them in Chapters 10 and 15.

Defining your story question

As soon as you know what your backdrop is and what change is looming, you have to define a story question. This is almost always a question about a single character in your story. This character is your protagonist, and the story question essentially asks whether the character will succeed or fail.
  A good story question focuses your story down to a single issue, clearly defining what success looks like and what failure means. Your story question should be

  ✓ Objective: The reader should (usually) know how to tell whether the lead character succeeded.

  ✓ Simple: The reader should be able to picture what success looks like.

  ✓ Important: The reader must believe the story question matters to the character.

  ✓ Achievable: The reader should believe that the answer to the story question could be yes.

  ✓ Difficult: The reader should believe that the answer to the story question could be no.

Will the Jackal shoot Charles de Gaulle? Will Frodo throw the Ring of Power into the Cracks of Doom? Will Dorothy get home to Kansas? Will Scarlett get Ashley? These story questions drive their stories for hundreds of pages. Every novel needs a story question. The better the story question, the more likely the reader will stay with the book until the end.

Story World Examples from  Four Well-Known Novels

In this section, we give examples of the story worlds for a number of novels, including a romance, a historical novel, a thriller, and a science fiction novel. We discuss cultural drivers and show how the backdrop of each story world leads naturally to a story question that defines the essential conflict for the story.

Pride and Prejudice

Pride and Prejudice is a romance novel that Jane Austen wrote in the early 19th century. The story takes place in England in the years 1811 and 1812. The novel centers on the Bennet home at Longbourn, with forays into London and Derbyshire. The natural world of the novel is therefore a very narrow one. It’s one small piece of the world and not a terribly exotic piece.
One cultural driver, however, makes the novel as interesting now as it was when first published. Mr. and Mrs. Bennet have five daughters, but none of them can inherit the Bennet estate of Longbourn because it has been “entailed” away to the nearest male relative, an irritating clergyman named Mr. Collins. The five Bennet girls have good social standing as the daughters of a gentleman, but they have no money, and therefore their prospects are bleak. The girls have no work skills and can’t support themselves. Their best hope is to marry men who are so wealthy that they don’t care that the girls are penniless. It was no easier to marry into money in 1811 than it is in the 21st century. This cultural driver, entailment, translates directly into gender inequality, giving Pride and Prejudice its timeless appeal.
When the story begins, the status quo is that the five Bennet girls are unmarried. The weak point in the status quo is that the two oldest daughters, Jane and Lizzie, are old enough to be married, and they’re in danger of becoming old maids if they don’t find respectable husbands soon. Their mother determines to marry them off at the first opportunity.
The story starts when change comes to the neighborhood. A wealthy young man, Mr. Bingley, is leasing the nearby Netherfield estate. Bingley has an income of 5,000 pounds per year. If one of the Bennet daughters were to marry him, then the other girls’ social standing would rise, and they might marry well also. The heroine, Lizzie Bennet, is the second of the five Bennet daughters. Lizzie makes her own situation more difficult because she dreams of marrying for love, not for money.
So here’s the story question: Can Lizzie find a man of good character who will love her despite her poverty?

The Pillars of the Earth

The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follet, is a historical novel with strong elements of suspense and romance. Published in 1989, the novel is set in 12th-century England, between the years 1123 and 1174. The story centers on a fictitious town, Kingsbridge, similar to an actual town of that name. The natu-ral world of the story stays entirely within England.
The novel features numerous cultural drivers:

  ✓ English barons are doing all they can to weaken King Henry I and his family. The story begins with the sinking of the White Ship and the drowning of Henry’s only legitimate heir, William. Civil war wracks England through much of the novel, and by the end, King Henry II — punished for the murder of Archbishop Thomas Becket — no longer stands above the law.

✓ Architecture is changing as Islamic mathematicians and engineers spread their new ideas to Europe through Spain. The new Gothic architecture is displacing the old Romanesque architecture across Europe.

  ✓ In Kingsbridge, a three-way power struggle continues among the bishop, the prior of the monastery, and the earl. The monks of the monastery want to build a cathedral, but they lack an experienced builder.

When the story begins, the status quo is that King Henry is a powerful king. The weak point is that the aging Henry has only one legitimate heir, William. When Henry’s enemies scuttle the White Ship, William’s death leaves the succession to the throne in doubt, opening the way for civil turmoil.Tom Builder, who knows little of royal politics, is the main character in the early part of the book. Tom wants nothing more than to build a cathedral to the glory of God. When he is hired to build the Kingsbridge cathedral, he allies himself with the monastery faction, earning himself the enmity of the other sides. The civil turmoil in England throws huge obstacles in Tom’s path.
Here’s the story question: Can Tom and his adopted son Jack complete the monastery when it is threatened by civil war, local enemies, and a sea change in architectural design?

Patriot Games

Patriot Games is a thriller by Tom Clancy, published in 1987 and set in the early 1980s. The story takes place partly in London, partly in Ireland, and partly in the U.S.
The main cultural driver is the long-running civil conflict in Northern Ireland between Catholics and Protestants. The status quo is that the Irish Republican Army (IRA) never attacks the royal family. The weak point is that a new faction, the Ulster Liberation Army (ULA), has formed, and it has no scruples about whom it attacks. The ULA is small, secretive, well-financed, highly trained, and heavily armed. Its goals including kidnapping the royal family and subverting the Provisional IRA.
The story begins when the ULA attacks Prince Charles and his wife and infant son in London in broad daylight. Only quick action by Jack Ryan prevents the ULA from succeeding. Ryan is a history professor at the Naval Academy, but he is being romanced by the CIA, which hopes to hire him as an analyst. When Ryan rescues the royal family, he becomes an instant hero in Great Britain — and an instant enemy of the shadowy ULA.
Here’s the story question: Can Jack Ryan track down the ULA and bring them to justice before they wreak vengeance on him and his family?

Ender’s Game

Ender’s Game is a science fiction novel by Orson Scott Card, published in 1985. The story takes place partly on Earth, partly on a planetoid named Eros, and mostly in Battle School — a large spaceship that orbits Earth. The time is at least a century in our future but not much more than that.Several cultural groups play in Ender’s Game. Earth has three main political leaders: the Hegemon, the Polemarch, and the Strategos. Most countries speak a language called Standard, but many of them teach their own tongue to their children as a second language. People carry on robust political dis-cussion on the “nets.” Behind the façade of international unity lie all the old ugly nationalisms, but these have been temporarily put aside because of the threat of outside invasion.
The backdrop is complex. Some 80 years before the beginning of the story, an alien race of intelligent ant-like creatures (“buggers”) tried to invade Earth. Humanity repelled the first invasion with difficulty. When the second invasion came, all seemed lost, but an extraordinary warrior, Mazer Rackham, narrowly defeated the buggers. Earth now anxiously awaits the third invasion, expecting far more terrible weapons.
Human technology has advanced since the second invasion. The key break-through came when humans developed “ansible” technology, allowing them to communicate instantly at any distance across the galaxy. Before ansible technology, radio communications allowed the International Fleet to send messages only at the speed of light. That was painfully slow across the vast stretches of the galaxy. The ansible gives Earth a fighting chance, but it won’t be enough, because the buggers far outnumber humans.
Humanity’s only hope is to find some military genius like Mazer Rackham to repel the buggers. The International Fleet scours the Earth in search of children of exceptional promise and whisks them up to an orbiting Battle School for training. The status quo is that the buggers could arrive at any moment, but humanity is unprepared. The weak point in the status quo is that one 6-year-old boy looks like the first plausible candidate.
Young Andrew Wiggin (nicknamed Ender) is a rare third child on an overpopulated Earth in which few families are allowed more than two children. Ender shows extraordinary military promise. He is smart, tough, and perfectly balanced between his exceptional capacity for empathy and his razor-minded brutality.
Ender’s Game is the story of how Ender willingly undergoes a horrific training program to prepare for the buggers’ coming invasion. Ender’s trainers believe that the next war will end with the annihilation of either humanity or the buggers.

Here’s the story question: Can Ender Wiggin rise through the ranks in Battle School and graduate in time to save his people?

Researching Your Story World

Your knowledge of how the world works makes it possible for you to live, eat, hold a job, get a spouse, start a family, have friends, throw a party, celebrate holidays, travel, write a will, file a lawsuit, and get protection from your enemies. If you don’t know how these things work in your story world, how will you write about your characters as they try to do each of those things?
  Research helps immunize you against that dreaded disease known as writer’s block, which often comes from just not knowing enough about your story world. It gives you powerful new insights that excite you and that may eventually excite your reader.
What do you need to know about your story world? Everything! But because total knowledge is impossible, your research is always going to be incomplete. For all practical purposes, you need to do enough research to satisfy your reader’s expectations. We aren’t going to discuss how to do your research here, but here are your obvious sources of information:

  ✓ Personal experience (which you can always expand)

  ✓ Other people

  ✓ Books

  ✓ The Internet

  ✓ The many other sources that you’ve developed over a long life of learning

Our main concern here is to tell you what sorts of things you actually need to research about your story world — and how much research to do — in order to write your book.

Identifying what you need to  know about your story world

You may already have your story world’s natural world, cultural groups, and backdrop well in mind (see the earlier sections), or you may still be trying to sort them out. Regardless, asking yourself some questions can help you get the level of detail you need to create a convincing sense of time and place for the reader.

We can never give you a complete list, but here are some of the main topics you need to research (or already know) about your story world:

  ✓ Geography: Geography is the physical layout of your world — continents, oceans, rivers, lakes, mountains, and much more. If your story takes place on multiple planets, you need to know the geography of each one. If your story is restricted to one country or city or house, you can restrict your research to the geography of that single location.

  ✓ Climate: Climate is defined by the long-term weather patterns of your story world. Is your region sunny all year? Is it perpetually frozen? How much rainfall does it get? What is the average temperature in winter, spring, summer, and fall? (Do you even have those four seasons, or are there more or fewer of them? For instance, does your region have a rainy season and a dry season instead? Something else?) How often do you get fog in your story world? Thunderstorms? Hail? Tornadoes? Hurricanes? Earthquakes?

  ✓ Cultural groups: What races of people (or other intelligent beings) inhabit your story world? How have they clustered together into family groups, tribes, political units, nations, empires, and federations? Why did they cluster this way? What political conflicts hold these groups in tension with one another?

  ✓ History: How long have the cultural groups in your story world been keeping track of their past? Do they keep an oral or written history? What is that history? What wars have they fought? Were there periods of peacetime, and if so, what were they like? What cultural developments have marked progress in your story world?

  ✓ Languages: What languages do your various cultural groups speak, and how are these languages related? Are some languages broken out into various dialects? Do some groups speak more than one language, and if so, what is the religious, historical, or political explanation? Do the different groups readily or rarely learn each others’ languages?

  ✓ Culture: What is the cultural world of your people groups? What do they eat, how do they eat it, and with whom do they eat? How do they choose their life partners, or do they have life partners? What do they wear? When do they sleep, or do they sleep? What sort of homes do they live in?
   What sort of employment do they seek? Are they entrepreneurs, or do they rely on Big Brother for their security? Are they specialists in their work, or do they do a little of everything?
   What kinds of entertainment help them while away the hours when they aren’t working — or do they even have any free time? What sports do they play? What art do they create? What literature do they read and write? What legal system protects their rights?

✓ Science and technology: What is the level of scientific development of your various cultural groups? What about engineering and technological accomplishments? Do some groups have a technical advantage over others? Do they use this advantage to oppress others militarily or economically, and if so, how? What fractures does this cause in the society of your story world?

  ✓ Religion, mythology, and purpose: How do your various cultural groups explain their origin and the origin of the world? Are these explanations religious, mythological, scientific, or something else? What purpose do your cultural groups believe they have for existing? What future do they see for themselves? Is it a future of peaceful coexistence with other groups or a future of domination over them? Or will the ultimate future mean eliminating other cultural groups completely?

If you’re writing science fiction, fantasy, or historical fiction, these questions are just a start, and you’ll need to dive deep in your research. On the other hand, if you’re following the well-known advice to “write what you know,” then you may find that these questions are irrelevant for your story and that you have no research at all on your plate.Knowing how much research is enough
You do have to quit researching at some point. If you don’t, you’ll never write your novel. J. R. R. Tolkien constructed Middle Earth over several decades, but he eventually did sit down to write The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.
  How much research is enough? You need to know about 100 times as much as you’ll actually use in your novel. We can’t prove this, but we believe it strongly.If your story world is the ordinary world in which you live, your research may be mostly done. You’ve been living in this world long enough to know how to write a novel, so you’ve likely absorbed far more than this minimum standard.
If you don’t know your story world extremely well, then you need to get busy. The amount of research you need to do depends heavily on your category. The following categories require the most research; all the other categories allow you quite a bit of freedom:

  ✓ Historical: Note that historical novels are not an official category; the word historical is an adjective that can apply to just about any of the categories we discuss in Chapter 3. But ignoring that technicality, if you’re writing a historical novel of any flavor, you need to do great heaping gobs of research.

The general rule is that you shouldn’t make up anything if you can possibly track it down. But if something really isn’t known, filling in the gaps with your enlightened imagination is okay.

  ✓ Science fiction and fantasy: Science fiction and fantasy novels generally require a specialized kind of research called world-building. You need to answer the same kinds of questions that you would if you were researching a historical novel, but instead of looking things up in a library, you invent them out of your own rich inner life. The main requirement here is that your story world be internally consistent.
   If you’re writing science fiction or fantasy, you may find it helpful to study other cultures here on Earth to get an idea of the range of variation that’s possible even on a single planet. That may guide you in dreaming up plausible cultures elsewhere.

  ✓ Military technothrillers: Military technothrillers were essentially invented by Tom Clancy, who is famous for his meticulous research. If you’re going to write this kind of novel, you need to be accurate when you talk about weapons, equipment, tactics, strategy, and logistics. Your readers will be only too happy to point out any errors, and one blunder can cost you their respect — and their business.

  ✓ Legal thrillers: Legal thrillers typically go fairly deeply into arcane legal details. If you’re going this route, you need to do your homework. If you’re actually a lawyer, you have the advantage here; if you’re not, then hit the books or find a legal eagle who’s willing to help you.If you love research, the painful truth is that you will never know enough about your story world to make you happy. You’ll always be discovering cool new things. If you take time to write a novel this year, you may find out something next year that proves you wrong in this year’s novel. You have to take that risk. Life is short, and research is endless, so come up for air when you’ve done enough. And “enough” means that you know 100 times as much as you need to write your novel. This means you! We mean it — stop when you know that much.
  Whether you’re setting a story in your own world or in some foreign one, please, please, please remember the flip side of the rule: Don’t tell everything you know in one novel. (We’ve read novels in which the author decided to put in everything he knew. Trust us on this — the epidemiology of bat diseases is not nearly as fascinating to your reader as it is to you.) Tell only 1 percent of what you know. If you take our advice to know 100 times more than what you need, you can write another 99 books without doing one more speck of research.

Being Able to Explain Your Story World to Sell Your Book

  Sooner or later, you need to understand your story world well enough to define the backdrop for your story. You need this if you’re ever going to explain to an agent or editor what your story’s about. Get out a sheet of paper or open a file in your word processor and answer each of the following questions:

  ✓ What is the natural world for your story? Describe the limits of geography for events in your story. If your story depends on some natural disaster, describe it. If you’re writing fantasy and your story includes magic, describe its limitations. If you’re writing science fiction and your story depends on different laws of physics or any other branch of sci-ence, explain how it differs from our ordinary world. Limit your answer to one or two paragraphs.

  ✓ What are the cultural groups in your story? Describe each cultural group, explaining the main cultural drivers (politics, language, economics, history, laws, sociology, religion, mythology, and so on) that affect your story. Choose no more than three or four of these and explain why they matter.

  ✓ What makes change possible in your story? Is it a desire to get something, do something, or become something? Is it a looming disaster to be avoided? What prevented your story from happening earlier? What keeps it from happening later?
Now write a story question for your story. Use our earlier examples as guides, or phrase your story question in a form similar to this one: “Can [lead character] achieve [story goal] in spite of [story obstacle]?”
You may not know your story question yet. You may not understand your story world well enough, or you may not know which pieces of your backdrop are most important yet. But you will eventually. If you don’t know this information, don’t worry about it now, but keep thinking about it as you write. Someday, possibly when you least expect it, things will fall into place. When that happens, come back to this page and answer the questions here.
The process you follow to find your story doesn’t matter. Nor does it matter what order you take to get there. All that matters is that you eventually have a story that you can explain to an agent or editor and that will excite readers. Defining your story backdrop and story question are two pieces of that puzzle.



}
C
