✓  Self-Editing for Fiction Writers (Harper), by Renni Browne and Dave King: An essential guide to editing, with strong chapters on dialogue, interior monologue, and narrative summary.

 ✓  Getting Into Character (Wiley), by Brandilyn Collins: The information on subtexting in dialogue is worth the price of the book all by itself.




}
{

Chapter 11

Thinking Through Your Theme

In This Chapter

Why theme is important

Themes for 20 best-selling novels

Why you should think about theme last

Discovering your theme

Fiction is art, and all art carries a message of some sort. We call that message the theme of your story. A theme is the deep meaning of your novel, and many great novels pack powerful themes. Of course, a novel can have a thin or ambiguous theme and still be a fine story. Themes are important, but they’re not as important as giving your reader a powerful emotional experience.
In this chapter, we take a stab at analyzing the themes of a number of best-selling novels. Our purpose here is not to do a deep literary analysis. We just want to demystify the idea of theme by giving you some examples of themes for novels that you’re likely to have read.
Also, although theme is important, we believe that building your novel around a theme is hazardous. That feels too much like a sermon, not entertainment. Far better to let your theme grow naturally out of your story. You may not know what the theme of your novel is until you’ve revised it several times, so part of your problem as an author is to figure out what your story means. Later in this chapter, we give you several techniques to help you do that. 

Understanding Why Your Theme Matters

People mean different things when they talk about theme, so we give our definition of it here: Theme is the deep meaning of your book. It’s the central message you’re trying to get across to your reader. It may be “the moral of the story,” if you wrote your story to have a moral. It may be your own vision of how the world works, your philosophy of life, or your recipe for the perfect brownie. Your theme is whatever you want it to be.
  You may be wary of “message-driven art” and rightly so. We’re extremely wary of it ourselves. But you should also be wary of meaningless art. Art has meaning, just as food has flavor. It’s a mistake to make that flavor either too strong or too weak.
In this section, we discuss the usefulness of having a theme, explain what a theme looks like, and provide sample themes of 20 best-selling novels.

Looking at why writers include themes in their novels

  Different readers will read your story through their own mindsets, so they may come away from your novel with a different theme than the one you intended. Furthermore, truly great fiction may well contain a number of themes. Therefore, the theme of any novel is always ambiguous and open  to debate. That’s part of what makes reading fun.
Unless readers plan to analyze your novel for a report or book club, they probably won’t be too concerned about getting the “right” interpretation of your story — they’ll care more about what the story means to them. For the writer, theme is important because your story is the only contact most readers will have with you. The novel is your chance to show others how you view the world.
Consider this: You’re reading an online review of your first novel, which has just been released. It’s a good review, all things considered. The reviewer’s summary of the storyline follows the one you provided your editor years ago. And the reviewer loves your characters, calling them “strong and true.” He also praises your fast action and snappy dialogue. Generally, he likes your novel. You’re holding your breath when you get to the closing paragraph, which runs like this: “In the end, though, the author’s vapid vision of nihilistic existential despair leaves the reader feeling both exhausted and depressed.” Your jaw bounces a few times on your desktop. Huh? Since when do you have a vapid vision of nihilistic existential despair? What does that even mean? This reviewer doesn’t get your vision at all. He’s an idiot. It’s entirely possible that the reviewer is an idiot. However, it’s also possible that the reason that he doesn’t get your vision is that you haven’t given him enough evidence to figure it out. Lacking any idea of what your vision may be, the reviewer latches onto minor things you never intended to be central symbols. Hence that pesky “nihilistic existential despair” — probably taken from a throwaway line by a side character in a minor scene. What went wrong? That’s easy. Your story has a weak theme or none at all. 

Examining the features of a theme 

We like to summarize a theme in one sentence. It doesn’t have to be a deep sentence (although it’s nice if it is). But we’ll be blunt: If your novel isn’t deep, the theme sentence for it can’t be deep, either. Not everyone likes deep fiction, and that’s okay. The purpose of fiction is to give the reader a powerful emotional experience. The theme is an extra. If the emotional experiences you arouse in your reader are powerful enough, then she’ll probably buy into your theme. Otherwise, she probably won’t. 

  Your theme should have these features:

  ✓ True: Your theme sentence should express some truth about the world.

  ✓ Important: Your theme should be about the significant stuff in life.

  ✓ Short: Your theme should be a single sentence, not a manifesto.

Example themes for 20 novels

A good way to figure out how to write a theme sentence is to look at some examples. Be aware that every reader is going to take away something slightly different from your novel. If it’s a deep novel, different readers may take away very different things. Most of the novels we analyze here are pretty deep, so what we took away from them may be different from what you take away from them. We may even be wildly off. Try your own hand at defining the themes for these books and then compare your themes to ours. Is there some common ground? That’s likely to be part of the author’s intended message. We’re going to resist the urge to find as many themes as possible in these. Our theme sentences will give the main message that we personally took away from each of these novels.
We’ll admit right away that we had to guess at some of these themes. Not all of the authors felt it necessary to give their works a clear theme. Some authors prefer simply to entertain, without creating a message for their fiction. You may object that we’re assuming that it’s actually possible to discover the author’s intent. Yes, we do. If we thought an author’s intent was impossible to discover, we wouldn’t be writing this book. The author always runs the risk of being misunderstood, but we believe he also runs a very reasonable risk of being understood. We hope you’ll understand:

  ✓ The Lord of the Rings, by J. R. R. Tolkien (fantasy): “Good ultimately conquers evil, because evil defeats itself.”
   We’ve rephrased a famous sentence from the book: “Oft evil will shall evil mar.” The novel is an epic tale of the battle between good and evil. 

  ✓ River God, by Wilbur Smith (historical action-adventure): “Genius and guile are a match for raw strength.”
   The theme for this novel is nowhere spelled out, so this is what we took away from the novel. It’s an adventure tale set in ancient Egypt, with the genius slave Taita as narrator and lead character. Adventure novels typically put little importance on theme.

  ✓ The Clan of the Cave Bear, by Jean Auel (historical): “Neanderthals are real people, too.”
   The lead character Ayla is a young human girl who grows up in an adoptive family of Neanderthals. The story makes clear how genetically close the Neanderthal lineage is to the human.

  ✓ The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follett (historical thriller): “No man stands above the law.”
   This novel is a saga spanning half a century, ending about the time of the murder of Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury. Although we can’t be sure that we’ve captured Follett’s intent for the theme of this story, it’s certainly plausible in view of one of the final scenes. But another theme may be, “What goes around, comes around.” That’s a cliché, but clichés often work nicely as themes, even for deep novels.

  ✓ Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon (time-travel romance): “Love conquers all.”
   This is a romance novel, a genre not noted for deep themes. Perhaps our theme sentence actually applies to all romance novels. That’s perfectly okay. Themes need not be unique or profound. Fiction is not philosophy. Fiction is about creating a powerful emotional experience. We think Outlander is an outstanding story and that this theme sentence applies especially well to it.

  ✓ My Name is Asher Lev, by Chaim Potok (literary): “A great artist cannot avoid experiencing great pain — and inflicting it.”
   The themes of literary novels are often profound. This is a deep novel by a deep novelist, and the theme is correspondingly deep. We think this novel is especially interesting to fiction writers, who may well identify with the lead character, Asher Lev. It’s one of the best fictional portraits of an artist that we’ve seen.

✓ The Kite Runner, by Khaled Hosseini (literary): “There is a way to be good again.”
   We’ve quoted a sentence from the first chapter which represents well the core truth of this book.

  ✓ The Lovely Bones, by Alice Sebold (literary): “There is justice in this universe.”
   This novel is a bit hazy in its theme, and we’ve had to guess as to its intended meaning. Literary novels can be very ambiguous in their themes.

  ✓ The Speed of Dark, by Elizabeth Moon (literary): “To thine own self be true.”
   Taking a quotation from literature as your theme sentence is perfectly okay. This one is a quote from Shakespeare’s Hamlet, and it seems particularly appropriate for this novel. The lead character is a high-functioning autistic who is offered a chance to be cured. But will the cure change his fundamental identity? It’s a hard choice, and who’s to say which is the right answer? 

  ✓ The Time Traveler’s Wife, by Audrey Niffenegger (literary): “There is a love that transcends time.”
   This romantic literary novel is unforgettable. The lead character Clare is married to Henry, a man with a genetic defect that causes him to time-travel during moments of high stress. Can their love survive this wrinkle in time? Yes, but . . .

  ✓ Girl with a Pearl Earring, by Tracy Chevalier (literary historical): “A great artist will sacrifice everything for his art.”
   The theme for this novel is similar to that of My Name is Asher Lev. In both cases, a great artist is at the center of the story. In Girl with a Pearl Earring, the lead character is a young servant in the home of Johannes Vermeer, and the story provides a possible backstory for a famous painting by Vermeer.

  ✓ Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen (romance): “A man’s character is more important than his money, looks, or good humor.”
   Austen is a deep writer, and her novels can be assigned any number of themes, but we think ours is as good as any. Heroine Lizzie Bennet would like to fall in love with the man she marries, but not just any man. More than anything, she wants a man of strong character. A pleasant, pliable man like Mr. Bingley won’t do for Lizzie; she needs a man like Mr. Darcy.

  ✓ Contact, by Carl Sagan (science fiction): “God is a mathematician.”
   Carl Sagan’s novel about the first contact between humanity and aliens provides him with a platform to sound any number of themes, and it’s not easy to decide which may have been most important to Sagan. The novel speculates on a possible truce in the long-running feud between science and religion.

✓ Gorky Park, by Martin Cruz Smith (mystery): “No good deed goes unpunished.”
   We’ve chosen a well-known aphorism as the theme for this story about an honest cop who does his job in a dirty world.

  ✓ Blink, by Ted Dekker (Christian thriller): “God is in control, whether you think so or not.”
   This is a fairly common theme in Christian fiction and it resonates well with Dekker’s core audience.

  ✓ The Da Vinci Code, by Dan Brown (thriller): “Everything you thought you knew about Jesus is wrong.”
   The storyline essentially stops in the middle for three chapters while one of the characters expounds on this theme at length. The novel is heavily theme-oriented, which helped drive sales among those who liked the theme. The book drew sharp attacks from historians, who argued that everything Brown thinks he knows about Jesus is wrong. Those attacks made for great publicity, which also helped drive sales.

  ✓ The Man From St. Petersburg, by Ken Follett (historical thriller): “The most dangerous man is the one who cannot fear, because then he is impervious to everything except love.”
   Thrillers don’t normally spend much ink on developing themes, but we think we’re close to the truth. The assassin is one of the most likeable and reader-identifiable villains we’ve seen — incapable of fear until he finds a reason to love.

  ✓ The Firm, by John Grisham (legal thriller): “Be careful what you wish for.”
   Grisham’s protagonist Mitch McDeere is a poverty-stricken law student who only wants to get a decent job. He gets a fabulous one, but it comes with conditions that he doesn’t imagine until it’s too late.

  ✓ The Spy Who Came In From the Cold, by John le Carré (spy thriller): “Espionage is a dirty, dirty, dirty, dirty, dirty business.”
   When this novel was published in the early 1960s, spy novels typically featured shallow James Bond-like characters. Le Carré rewrote the rules on what you could do in a spy novel. We think this is still the best spy novel ever written.

  ✓ The Hunt for Red October, by Tom Clancy (military technothriller): “The Evil Empire will destroy itself through its own incompetence.”
   The theme for this novel is quite similar to the one we’ve assigned to The Lord of the Rings. Military technothrillers are often driven by strong principles of justice. Readers in this genre have an unbending sense of right and wrong and they want to see the good prevail and the evil  vanquished.

Deciding When to Identify Your Theme

  Theme is important, no doubt about it. But if you let it, a strong theme can take over your novel. If you write your novel mainly to advance your theme, here are the main hazards awaiting you:

  ✓ Your characters may be shallow. If you know your theme before you create your characters, then you’ll be mightily tempted to create them specifically to illustrate the theme. You’ll be tempted to avoid giving them conflicting values, because one of those values may contradict your theme or confuse your reader.

  ✓ Your plot may be contrived. If you already know your theme before you construct your plot, you’ll find it all too easy to tailor the story exactly to fit the theme. You’ll fear getting sidetracked in story threads or subplots that may detract from the message of the story. You may even cheat on the plot because you need to in order to make the story work out right.

  ✓ You may write a sermon. Of course, if your readers agree with your theme, they won’t consider it a sermon. But the readers who disagree with your theme will definitely consider your story a sermon — a heavy-handed and unwelcome one. A heavily theme-based novel is going to polarize your readership. It may also draw a firestorm of criticism from reviewers, who usually believe that a novel should be about entertainment first.
  Regardless of which creative paradigm you use (see Chapter 4), we believe you should develop your theme last in your story, when you’ve already worked out the main details of your story world, your characters, and your plot. That way, your story doesn’t take a back seat to your message. It’s not uncommon for novelists to write the entire story without really nailing down what it all means. They may in fact write several drafts before they figure it out. We think that’s good. We believe that the strongest themes are those that arise organically out of the story. In the next section, we help you discover the theme of your story.
Despite our advice, you may feel that you want to build a story from the ground up around some theme. You may not be worried at all by the prospect that readers will think you’re preaching a sermon. Is that okay? Yes, it’s your book, so you can write it however you want, but be aware that it’s a high-risk approach. (To be fair, it may also be a high-reward approach).
  If your story appears to be designed solely to promote a theme, agents and editors are going to be deeply suspicious of your work. Editors generally don’t like sermons masquerading as fiction. If that’s the kind of book you want to peddle, they’re going to be much tougher on you than you may have expected.
Because we’re wary of heavily theme-based fiction ourselves, we hate to admit this, but it’s a fact — if you build your novel from the ground up on a theme and if you can get it published, you may possibly see a very high reward for your labors. Many readers love theme-based novels that confirm their own beliefs. If readers fall in love with your theme, they may tell everyone they know, giving you extraordinary word-of-mouth publicity. Most readers only hate theme-based novels that appear to them to be pro-moting the “wrong” message. If some of your readers hate your message, they’ll definitely tell everyone they know, and they may even trash you in public — giving you even more word-of-mouth publicity. You can probably think of several recent massively best-selling novels that you consider pure tripe — dreckish sermons from first wretched word to last. And yet they sold like fire, because there’s no such thing as bad publicity for a fiction writer. Bad publicity just makes a novel that much more likely to wind up in the hands of people who don’t consider it a sermon at all — they think it’s straight, common sense. If you’re going to go this route, you need a boatload of humility, because you may well get wildly undeserved praise from your admirers and at the same time get a hellishly undeserved roasting from your critics. Don’t kid yourself that either your admirers or your critics are telling the truth. They’re reacting to your message, not to you.
  Writing a heavily theme-based novel is high-risk/high-reward. Before you write one, think three times about whether the rewards justify the risks.

Finding Your Theme

How do you find your theme? There isn’t any foolproof way to get there, but this section identifies some possible roads you can take.

Faking it till you make it

You probably have some idea of what the deep meaning of your story is, even from the very first day the idea for the story leaps into your mind. The theme may be fuzzy in your mind, but it’s there. When somebody asks what your theme is, being a little vague is perfectly okay.If you’re writing a romance, for example, you may say, “My story is about the enduring power of love.” Nobody is ever going to criticize that theme, for the simple reason that theme isn’t that big of a deal in a romance novel. Likewise, if you’re writing a thriller, you could say, “My story is about the power of _____.” Fill in the blank with any handy word that fits your story. “Fear” would work. So would “ambition.” So would “ignorance,” “knowledge,” “the little guy,” “multinational corporations,” “religion,” and “technology.” You really can put just about anything in that’s remotely related to your story, and you’ll have a decent working prototype for your theme.
Mystery readers typically are less interested in theme than in a good, original puzzle, so you probably won’t be asked about the theme if you’re writing a mystery. But if you are, you can play the same game as for a suspense novel.
If you’re writing a fantasy novel, you can always say, “It’s about the battle between good and evil.” This probably also works for many horror novels.
  You can be vague for a good long time using evasions like the preceding ones. The nice thing is that they aren’t really evasions. The theme of your novel most likely will be pretty much along the lines you’re claiming. As you work on your story, there may come a day when your theme springs brilliantly into focus. When that happens, you’ll know it. Don’t rush that day. Keep faking it with platitudes until you get there. Is that okay? Of course it is. You’re doing the best you can, working from the abstract to the concrete. Fiction is hard, and figuring out your theme is one of the hardest parts of it. It’s not your fault if you haven’t worked out something deep and profound yet. Nobody has the right to stampede you into coming up with a theme before its time, any more than they have the right to dictate to a vintner when the wine will be ready.
Depending on your category and your target reader and your own goals as a writer and the particular story you’re writing, there may never come a day when a powerful theme emerges. In that case, your theme will always be whatever vague platitude you started with. You aren’t required to have a unique and dazzling theme for your story. The examples that we show earlier in this chapter should make it clear that some novels have clearly defined deep themes, and some are much fuzzier. 

Reading your own novel for the first time

Assume that no voice from heaven has given you an inspired theme for your story. You’ve finished the first draft. You’ve edited it several times. Your story world feels as real as rain. Your characters are strong. Your plot zings at all six layers. And you still don’t quite know what your story’s about.Set your novel aside for a bit. Read somebody else’s work, preferably one with a strong theme. It doesn’t have to be terribly similar to your book; it just needs to be something fresh, preferably a book that many people agree is a really good book. Write a theme sentence for that other book. Now you’re in the frame of mind to come back to your novel. Sit down and read your entire book in one sitting. Pretend that this is the first time you’ve ever read it. Ignore any wording problems or plot choices or character glitches. Just read — fast. When you get to the end, close it and ask yourself, “What’s the author trying to say here?”
That may sizzle your synapses enough to come up with a profound theme sentence. It may. Then again, it may not.

Listening to your characters

If you’ve been careful to build real, three-dimensional characters, then you may want to try listening to them to see what they have to say. Read through some of their best scenes. At any point, do they get on their soap box and start shrieking? Did they surprise you? Did they say something you never would have said yourself? That may make a very nice theme.
  You may also want to try interviewing your characters to find your theme. Imagine you’re a journalist doing a profile of your characters for Time magazine. Ask each character what she learned from her experiences in your story. 
Write down the answers. Is there anything surprising that you hadn’t really thought about? If so, grab it.

Using test readers

  Most writers have any number of friends who love to read. When your novel is fairly well polished, give out copies to a few of your friends and ask them to read it. Promise that you’ll list them in the acknowledgments but only if they finish reading it by a certain deadline. If they meet your deadline, take them out for coffee and debrief them. Ask them what the novel meant to them. Did any of the characters say anything particularly striking? It’s just possible you’ll hit a nerve with one of your readers. If you’ve already got a theme in mind, your test readers will tell you if that theme is resonating with them.

Must you have a theme?

What if, despite your best efforts, you still can’t come up with a strong theme for your novel? What’s the worst that can happen? The worst that can happen is that some readers may read in a theme where none exists. They may accuse you of having a “vapid vision of nihilistic existential despair,” whatever that means. Being misunderstood can be painful, but you won’t die from it.
Other readers will see that you have no theme and will accuse you of being shallow. This is less bad than being misunderstood, but it’s still not fun. Very few writers want to be known as shallow. Again, it won’t kill you, so don’t take it personally.
  Many readers won’t even notice if your novel is missing a deep theme. Readers read for entertainment first, and plenty of them are looking for a nice beach read, not something profound. These readers won’t care if you don’t have a deep theme. 

Refining Your Theme

If you do find your theme, the odds are very high that it won’t be perfectly developed in your story. The reason is that you didn’t write the story merely to illustrate some sappy theme. You wrote the story to move your readers emotively, and in the process, a theme emerged. Now you need to buff that out a bit in your story. Read through your entire novel again, marking places where you could highlight the theme a little. The key word here is a little.
  Strengthen your theme but resist the urge to explain. Your reader is smart. Trust her to figure out what you have to say. What you’re looking for is places in your novel where the theme emerges naturally but it comes out fuzzy or distorted. Clarify those — that’s what we mean when we say you should strengthen your theme.
You’re also looking for places where the theme pokes its head up rather unnaturally — where it seems intrusive, forced, or just plain heavy handed. Trim it back there or take it out. The theme needs to advance the story, not weigh it down. Some of the litmus tests we use are the following: If the theme comes up in narrative summary, then it’s probably the author intruding into the story. If the theme comes up in a character’s dialogue or interior monologue, then it’s probably legitimate, especially if it advances the story. If the theme is hinted at by concrete actions in the story, then it’s almost always legitimate.
Be on the alert for places in your story where you contradict your theme. If you find them, then you can either resolve them so there’s no contradiction, or you can just acknowledge them with a line or two that makes it clear that you know that paradoxes abound and there aren’t any easy answers. Readers are smart and will spot contradictions that they think you missed. But if your characters acknowledge the contradiction — or wrestle with it — then your readers know that you know about it, and you’re off the hook.




}
{

Part III

Editing and Polishing 

Your Story and Characters

In this part . . .
Being able to produce perfect prose in your first draft every time would be great. However, the reality of writing is that great fiction always requires editing and polishing before it’s ready for prime time. In this part, we show you how to analyze your characters, scrutinize your story structure, and edit your scenes.

Chapter 12

Analyzing Your Characters

In This Chapter

Reading through your story with an eye toward characters

Keeping track of character details

Analyzing motivations

Evaluating your choice of narrator and POV character

Improving characters

After you’ve written your story, you need to put on your editing hat and make sure it’s as strong as possible. This begins with a careful analysis of your characters. Great fiction needs great characters, so don’t be afraid to rework your characters until they’re fully alive and three-dimensional.At some point, you should develop a character bible that spells out in one place everything there is to know about each character. You need this to maintain story consistency and to help you create fully rounded characters. It’s wise to start building your character bible before you start writing, even if you don’t know much about your characters. It’s also wise to keep adding to it as you write your story and when you do your high-level read-through after you finish the first draft. However, virtually all writers analyze their charac-ters only after writing the first draft, so we present this tool in this chapter.
In Chapter 7, we discuss the importance of character motivations, which we define as the sum total of a character’s values, ambition, and story goal. You can’t have a story without a story goal — the one concrete thing that your lead character wants to have or to do or to be. Normally, a story goal comes from some abstract ambition of the character. Ambitions ultimately arise from a character’s values — core truths that he believes are so obvious that they can’t and shouldn’t be explained. And where do values come from? That’s a mystery. Values can’t be fully explained, but you can give a good reason for them through your character’s backstory.

You may have written your story in a point of view that seems obvious to you. When you’re ready to edit your story, you need to reexamine that choice, verify that it makes sense for your story, and then check that you’ve been consistent in your POV choices throughout your manuscript.
In this chapter, we take you through the process of analyzing and improving the characters in your story. We discuss keeping track of fine details, revisiting your character’s motivations, making sure your choice of POV works, and strengthening your characters.

The High-Level Read-Through:  Preparing Yourself to Edit

Before you start editing your manuscript, you need to get the big picture. We strongly recommend that you do a high-level read-through to give you that big picture. At this point, you don’t do any actual editing. Instead, you just take notes on what you need to do, using the ideas we cover later in this chapter.
  Read through your complete manuscript, taking notes on every scene. You can take notes on paper, or you can insert comments into your document, using the comment feature on your word processor. Don’t edit anything; your goal is to make sure your characters work. As you read each scene, mentally answer the following questions:

  ✓ Who is the POV character for this scene? Is this the best POV character for this scene?

  ✓ If you’re writing in standard third person, first person, or second person, are you showing only what your POV character sees, hears, thinks, knows, feels, smells, tastes, or touches?

  ✓ If you’re writing in third person objective, do you ever accidentally use interior emotion or interior monologue? Does this mean that you’d secretly like to use the more usual third person?

  ✓ Do your characters have unique and distinctive voices in their dialogue and interior monologue?

  ✓ Are your characters boring, shallow, unbelievable, or unlikeable?After you finish your high-level read-through, you still have to do a lot of work to fix your characters. Go through these steps in order:

  1.  Review all your notes, looking for patterns.

    What are the main problems with each of your characters?

2.  Spend some time meditating on your characters.

    What changes do you need to make to bring your characters up to snuff?

  3.  Revise your character bible for each character to make each one better.

    See the following section for info on how to develop a character bible.

  Don’t make any changes in your manuscript yet. You may have some problems in your story structure and scenes that you also need to fix. Because character and plot are intertwined, you really need to think through them both before you begin making changes. When you make the edits we describe in Chapters 13, 14, and 15, also take into account everything new you discover about your characters in this chapter.

Developing a Bible for Each Character

You’re reading your e-mail from your fans and find one that looks promising. The subject line reads, “Loved your novel!!!!” You open the e-mail and scan it:
Dear Author:
I was up all night reading your novel and loved every word of it. You had me fooled all the way, so congratulations, because I read a lot and it’s hard to pull one over on me. I’m working on a novel of my own. Not that you have to read it, so don’t feel obligated, but are you interested? By the way, can I offer my services as a proofreader? I noticed that Katie Sue has green eyes on page 17, but on page 323, her eyes are brown. And Jonas is 180 pounds on page 3, but three chapters later, he’s up to 210, even though I never noticed him eating a thing. And how is it that his maternal grandmother is Irish the first time we hear about her, Hungarian the second time, and back to Irish at the end? Other than that, great story! Let me know about the proofreading. I’m cheap because I’m only 12.
Your fan, Jim Bob

The fact is that mistakes happen. You’ll never write a perfect book. (If you do, you’ll be insufferable and other authors will treat you the way the other reindeer treated Rudolf.) But your goal should always be perfection, even if you know you’ll never reach it. You’ll be punished for every mistake with letters from a few Jim Bobs, and not all of them will be nice.

One of the most embarrassing mistakes you can make is inconsistency in your characters. Shifting eye color, rapid weight gains or losses, and drifting ethnic heritages are just three of the many inconsistencies that can sneak into your story. When you have only one or two main characters in your book, or when you’ve written only one book, you’re not likely to make many mistakes. But as your characters and books proliferate, they all start blending together. Your protection against all such errors is to write up a bible for your characters. In your character bible, you keep a record of all the details that you need to remember for each character. Your character bible doesn’t need to be fancy. It just needs to get the job done, and you need to save it where you can always find it.

Writers use character bibles for two distinct purposes:

  ✓ As a creative tool: Writing a character bible is a terrific exercise to get to know all the characters in your story. It’s a powerful tool that sparks your creativity in unpredictable ways. You can’t know in advance which details will affect your story and which won’t, so record everything in your character bible, even details you’re sure won’t matter to the story.
   Even if you don’t create your character bible until after you’ve finished your first draft, writing it may suggest new, creative ideas for the second draft. We’ve often seen some of those insignificant details suggest plot developments later in the story. For instance, even if you think you’ll never need to know what your character’s first dog was named, writing down the fact that it was a greyhound may later suggest to you that your character knows all about dog racing and the gambling world.

  ✓ As an editing tool: If you record all the myriad details about each character, you can consult your bible when you have a question about consistency. At 3 a.m. on the night before your book is due, it’s a lot easier to browse through a ten-page character bible looking for Katie Sue’s eye color or Jonas’s weight than it is to search through your entire manuscript.We recommend that you have a special folder on your hard drive named something like “Books Written.” There, make a folder for every book that you write, named with your working title or an abbreviation of it. In the folder for your book, make another folder named “Research” and save your character bible there. You can create a document named “Characters” that contains all the critical information on all the characters in your novel.

What goes into your character bible? Just about anything that helps you understand your characters better or that helps you remember the myriad details that you need to keep straight. We recommend that you consider at least the following main categories:

✓ Physical traits

  ✓ Emotional and family life

  ✓ Intellectual life

  ✓ Backstory and motivation

This section describes these elements in detail.

Physical traits

Physical traits are the easiest things to track and the most embarrassing to get wrong, because there really can’t be any decent explanation when those eyes drift from blue to brown. You should record anything you consider important. Here are a few of the specific traits we recommend that you track:

  ✓ Date of birth and age

  ✓ Height and weight

  ✓ Ethnic heritage

  ✓ Hair and eye color

Include a detailed physical description, including scars or physical handicaps, along with the character’s usual style of dressing.

Emotional and family life

Your readers want to know what your character’s private life is like. This is a bit more open-ended than the physical traits. Here are some points to get you started. Consider these and any other issues that seem appropriate for your characters:

  ✓ What’s your character’s personality like? Describe it in 25 words or less.

  ✓ What kind of sense of humor does your character have?

  ✓ What’s your character’s religious faith? Explain where it came from.

  ✓ What political party does your character belong to and why?

  ✓ What’s the character’s family like? Describe it, including parents, siblings, and children. You may include grandparents, cousins, a spouse, or anyone else relevant.

✓ What are the character’s friends like? Describe them, including your character’s best male friend and best female friend.

  ✓ Who are your character’s enemies? Explain how they came to be enemies.

  ✓ What is in your character’s pockets, wallet, purse, or backpack? Describe the contents in detail.

  ✓ What’s your character’s home like? Describe it in detail.

  ✓ What is your character’s happiest childhood memory? His worst?

  ✓ How would your character describe himself?

  ✓ How would your character’s friends describe him? 

Intellectual and work life

Your character has a public face, including education and possibly a career. Here are some things that you may need to describe in your character bible:

  ✓ Your character’s educational background

  ✓ What sort of employment your character has and his work history

  ✓ Your character’s favorite music, books, and movies

  ✓ Any interesting hobbies

  ✓ Your character’s personal philosophy (and where it came from)

Backstory and motivation

Spelling out your characters’ backstory and motivation in writing somewhere is critical, and your character bible is a fine place to put this info so you’ll always have it handy. Your character bible needs to cover backstory and motivation at some length. If you haven’t worked them out for your main characters, we highly recommend that you work through the exercises in Chapter 7 for each character. There’s simply no substitute for doing these exercises.
In your character bible, aim for a page or more of backstory on each of your main characters and a bit less for the minor characters. You also need at least a few sentences to spell out the values, ambitions, and story goals of your main characters.
  You can work on backstory and motivation at any time, depending on your creative paradigm. (See Chapter 4 for a discussion of your creative paradigm and how it influences the order in which you do your creative work.) If you’re a seat-of-the-pants writer or an edit-as-you-go writer, you may well write the entire first draft of your book first, before you ever think much about backstory or motivation. If you’re a Snowflaker or an outliner, then you probably enjoy developing backstory and motivation first, so that your first draft will be as close as possible to your last draft. Whatever works for you is fine, but do the work!
In the next section, we ask you to psychoanalyze your character and probe his motivations more deeply.

Psychoanalyzing Your Characters

The biggest problem writers have with characters’ motivations is not giving them any. The main solution is to make a conscious effort to name the following core pieces of motivation for each main character (which we introduce in Chapter 7):

  ✓ Values: What are the core truths for your character? You can have several of these.

  ✓ Ambition: What one abstract thing does your character want most in the world?

  ✓ Story goal: What one concrete thing does your character believe she needs to do or have or become in order to achieve her ambition?
If you have these worked out for your characters, that’s great! Then your goal in editing is to make them better to deepen your character, sharpen the conflict of the story, and make it all reasonable to your reader. This section can help you do so.

Are values in conflict?

  Every character has values, and great stories thrive on conflicts between values. Values are core truths — things your character believes to be true without examining them. When your main character’s core truths are in conflict, then he can’t be predictable, and neither can your story.
Consider two conflicting values of Don Corleone, the Mafia leader in Mario Puzo’s The Godfather:

  ✓ “Nothing is more important than respect.”

  ✓ “Nothing is more important than family.”

Don Corleone’s troubles begin when a rising young Mafioso comes to him with a proposal for a joint venture in narcotics. Corleone believes that this sort of crime is bad business, and he’ll have nothing to do with it. But Sonny, the oldest son of Don Corleone, exposes his interest in the matter by questioning his father’s judgment in front of the drug-dealing Mafioso, an act of blatant disrespect. Afterward, Don Corleone reprimands his son, but he doesn’t oust him. His love of family has come into conflict with his need for respect.
It’s a fatal mistake. The spurned Mafioso, sensing weakness, tries to assassinate Don Corleone so he can negotiate a deal with Sonny. This leads to a terrible war of attrition between the Corleones and the Five Families of New York.
  As you read your story, ask whether the values of your lead character are in conflict. If not, can you revise them to be in conflict? Can you add a new value that will conflict with the existing ones?

Do the values make sense from the backstory?

Your characters generally can’t give any reasons for their values. A value is a truth so sacred, so true, that it simply can’t be explained. If a character can explain his values, then you haven’t taken him far enough — some core truths beneath those values explain them. In that case, those underlying core truths are his real values.
  You are not your character. You are the god of the universe that you’re creating as your story world. You are omniscient, and you can explain your character’s values — at least to some degree — from his backstory. Somewhere in the half-remembered mists of time lie the reasons for your character’s values. 

Searching for the source of Don Corleone’s values

Why does Don Corleone value respect so much? Why does he call himself a “man of respect”? He can give no reason, because it’s obvious to him. But the answer is that Don Corleone is a Sicilian, raised in an honor culture. In such a culture, honor is worth more than money. Corleone’s criminal enterprises in the U.S. depend critically on holding the respect of his friends and his enemies.
Why does Don Corleone value family so much? Again, it’s part of his Sicilian culture. Blood loyalty is everything; no explanation is needed. None is possible, and Don Corleone would be astonished that anyone would ask for one.

But not all Sicilians become Mafia dons. What explains Don Corleone’s rise to power as the head of one of the most vicious crime families in the country? Don Corleone holds another value that we haven’t discussed yet: “A man is responsible to use power in every possible way to benefit his family and those who respect him.”
This value becomes clear in the first chapter of The Godfather, when Don Corleone receives four different visitors on the wedding day of his daughter. Each visitor needs something from him, but his responses to each one show his values clearly. Those who have a history of showing respect to Corleone get what they want; those who don’t have such a history must learn respect first and then reap the benefits of knowing the Godfather.
Where did Don Corleone develop this value? Readers don’t discover the answer until a number of chapters into the book, when Mario Puzo provides a number of pages of the backstory, showing how a quiet, humble Sicilian young man transformed into the powerful Godfather by a series of choices that he made in a world that treats quiet, humble Sicilian young men with contempt and injustice. By the end of this long backstory sequence, the reader still doesn’t consider Don Corleone a moral man. However, the reader understands how Corleone justifies his actions to himself.

Making sense of your characters’ values

Some of your characters will inherit cultural values; others will create their values based on early life experiences. You should be able to give some justification for each value; however, don’t expect to be able to make an ironclad case that these “core truths” are in fact true. Values are intensely personal and by their nature can’t be proven. The best you can do is to make a reasonable case that your character’s values make sense to him, given his culture, personality, genetic traits, and life experiences. That’s all you need.

  As you read through your manuscript, ask the following questions:

  ✓ Do the values of your characters make sense to you? Even if you don’t agree with those values, can you understand how your characters came to believe them?

  ✓ If the values don’t make sense, then can you find a way for each character to justify the values that currently seem implausible?

  ✓ If your justification for any of the values seems weak, can you strengthen it? If you can’t, then those values are broken and you need to come up with something more plausible, because your reader isn’t going to believe that anyone would hold those values.

Every character thinks he’s the hero of the story; no character believes he’s evil incarnate. Characters justify their behavior by their values, core truths that they consider “obviously true.” The more likely your reader is to reject your character’s values, the more you need to work to show a backstory that explains how those values came to exist. Your reader must believe that your character believes his values to be absolutely true — that’s the secret to creating three-dimensional characters.

Does ambition follow from values?

Each character has an ambition — one abstract thing that he wants more than anything else in life. Some characters know this early in their story; others only gradually develop an ambition. Regardless, that ambition needs to spring from the character’s values.
The Godfather is the story of how Michael Corleone, the youngest son of Don Corleone, develops an ambition to be like his father. At the beginning of the story, that seems like an unlikely ambition for Michael. The year is 1945, and he’s a clean-cut Army veteran and college boy who has apparently renounced his family’s criminal connections and has a non-Italian girlfriend who thinks he’s kidding when he talks about his father’s dark past.
Yet Michael Corleone is made of the same steel as his father, with the same ferocious will and the same icy control over his emotions. He shares his father’s values — family ties and respect — without being able to explain them any better than his father can. When Don Corleone is critically wounded by a rival Mafioso, it’s Michael Corleone, the white sheep of the family, who volunteers to kill the man who ordered the hit. This is Michael’s first step toward an ambition he only dimly realizes — to be a man like his father.
That ambition arises directly from Michael’s values. Until his father was shot, Michael could afford to distance himself from the family business. But Michael can’t simply walk away without avenging this hit. He can’t. His blood ties demand it. Having decided to take vengeance, Michael chooses to do it in a way that earns him respect, even from his older brothers and his father’s tough caporegimes. Michael has other options, but none of them would command respect. Michael is more his father’s son than he knew.
  As you read through your story, ask whether you’ve defined an ambition for each of your main characters. Does that ambition spring directly from at least one of the character’s values? If not, you have two options:

  ✓ Find a new value to give your character that will explain this ambition.

  ✓ Change the ambition to be in line with the character’s values.

Will the story goal satisfy the ambition?

Every lead character needs a story goal — a concrete wish to get something, achieve something, or become something. Until your primary character has a story goal, you have no story; you have only a set of incidents that mean nothing to the reader. After you have a story goal, your reader invests in the story. 

You’ve set the hook: Will the lead character reach his story goal or not?

A story goal must be objective, simple, important, achievable, and difficult (see Chapter 7 for details). But in the editing stage, you need to verify one other thing: Would reaching the story goal actually achieve your lead character’s ambition? If not, then that’s a problem.

Achieving Michael Corleone’s ambition

In The Godfather, Michael Corleone feels impelled to kill the man who ordered the hit on his father, along with the dirty police captain who’s in league with him. Corleone shoots them in a restaurant where the three have met to negotiate a peace. Twenty minutes later, he’s on a boat headed for Sicily, where he’ll lie low until the heat dies down.
That ends Act 1, and it’s a disaster for Michael. He had planned to marry his WASP (white Anglo-Saxon Protestant) girlfriend and settle down to an ordinary life outside the shadow of his family’s criminal ventures. Now he’s banished to hide out in Sicily, and his story goal is apparently very simple: to come home. 
However, it’s more complicated than that. Yes, Michael wants to come home, but come home as what? Michael knows, and the reader knows, that Michael can never come home and resume his former life as a law-abiding citizen. Michael Corleone is a murderer, with a death sentence over his head from five rival Mafia families. He’s a cop-killer with a long prison sentence awaiting him, courtesy of the American justice system.
If Michael Corleone comes home again, he’ll need the help of his father and family and the alternative system of power that they maintain. Michael Corleone can never come home clean. He’ll have to come home as a member of the Corleone syndicate or not at all. By virtue of his bloodline, he’ll be in competition with his two older brothers. Who will become the new Godfather when Don Corleone eventually retires or dies? If Michael Corleone comes home, he has no choice but to aim for that position. He’s the smartest of the three sons, but is he the toughest? After showing his strong moralistic leanings early, can Michael come home as the new Godfather? That’s the story question that carries the story for the rest of the book.
Michael Corleone’s ambition is to become a man like his father, an ambition that he could achieve in many ways. But the path he chooses is to become his father.

Evaluating your main characters’ story goals and ambitions

  You can define your story goal at any point in Act 1 of your story (which usually takes up the first quarter of your story — see Chapter 8 for details on three-act structure). The earlier you do it, the clearer your story will be to your reader. But many great stories don’t clearly specify the story goal until the disaster at the very end of Act 1.
  Ask the following questions as you read through your story:

  ✓ Does each of your main characters have a story goal? If not, then you need to define one; otherwise, that character exists only to advance the story of one of the other characters. Every character must have a life of his own.

  ✓ Does each story goal spring directly from the character’s ambition?

  ✓ Is the story goal objective, simple, important, achievable, and difficult? If it fails on any of these points, can you recast it?

  ✓ Does each main character have a story goal that you’ve clearly spelled out by the end of Act 1? If not, can you nudge that character to develop a story goal sooner?

The Narrator: Fine-Tuning  Point-of-View and Voice

Which kind of narrator you use and how that narrator tells the story can have a big impact on whether your characters and your story work. In this section, we help you reevaluate your choice of both point of view (POV) and POV character, ensure that your writing’s consistent, and consider character voice.

Does your POV strategy work?

Every story needs a point-of-view strategy (see Chapter 7 for a review of six common choices for POV). The three most common of these, in order, are

  ✓ Third person: You show the scene from inside the skin of one character, using third-person pronouns such as he or she.

  ✓ First person: You show the scene from inside the skin of one character, using first-person pronouns such as I and me.

  ✓ Head-hopping: You show the scene from inside the skin of several characters, hopping from one head to another, in each case using third-person pronouns.

What POV choice did you make in your manuscript? In this section, you revisit your decision and make sure it’s working, because a wrong choice can sink your story.

Evaluating your POV

In this section, we help you make sure you use your POV choice to your best advantage. For more information on the advantages and disadvantages of each POV, see Chapter 7.

Third person

Third person POV is accepted in all categories, so if you’re using it, then you really don’t need to worry any more about your choice. Third person is a good, safe bet.
Here are some questions to help you make sure that you’re using third person to its best effect:

  ✓ Is it clear in every scene who the POV character (the character you want readers to identify with) is? Do you establish the POV character as early as possible in the scene?

  ✓ Do you accidentally slip out of the POV character’s head to tell readers things he doesn’t know or to show readers things he can’t see?

  ✓ Do you tell the reader information in narrative summary that you could slip in as dialogue or interior monologue (with suitable subtlety)?

  ✓ Have you made sure you filter description through the emotional lens of the POV character?

First person

Some readers don’t like first person POV, and we’re not sure why, because there’s no good technical reason to dislike first person. It’s at least as good as third person POV for giving your reader a powerful emotional experience. But the fact remains that some readers refuse to read a book in first person. Ask the following questions to help you make the most of first person POV:

  ✓ Is your POV character — the narrator — able to be present for most of the action? One problem with first person can arise when your narrator can’t physically be on the scene for all the action; then you have to resort to having other characters tell what happened in those scenes. Would it make sense to use multiple POV characters so you can have another narrator be at those scenes?

  ✓ Are you giving too much airtime to the narrator’s interior monologue and narrative summary? Both of these are valuable techniques, but the question is whether they’re out of proportion.

✓ Are you taking full advantage of the intimacy that first-person narration gives you?

  ✓ If your narrator has a unique voice, does it permeate the entire story, including the actions and descriptions of other characters?

Head-hopping

  Most editors we’ve talked to hate the head-hopping POV and will ignore your protests that “Margaret Mitchell did it in Gone With the Wind.” Editors who don’t like head-hopping will cut you off at the knees with a comment like, “You’re not Margaret Mitchell. Come back when you are.” If you’re using a head-hopping POV, ask the following questions:

  ✓ Do you have a good reason every time you switch to a new POV character within each scene?

  ✓ Do you hop heads so often that the reader can’t identify strongly with the focal character in each scene?

  ✓ Can you reduce the amount of head-hopping without damaging the emotional impact of your story?

Omniscient

Using omniscient POV isn’t common these days. It’s very hard to do well. Many editors consider omniscient a red flag. Complaining that this or that author whom you like uses omniscient POV doesn’t help — that argument doesn’t carry much weight unless you can write as well as that author. If you’re using omniscient POV, ask yourself the following:

  ✓ Do you have a compelling reason for giving information that none of the characters can know?

  ✓ Do you give your reader a fair share of time inside the heads of your important characters? If not, can you increase the time you spend there?

  ✓ Can you reduce the number of transitions in and out of the heads of characters?

  ✓ Are your omniscient segments as strong as possible?

Second person

Second person POV is difficult to do well, and many readers simply rebel at the notion of reading a story in second person. It can work if you know what you’re doing, but it’s going to be a strike against you in any novel — and two strikes against you in your debut novel. So think very long and hard before choosing this option, and get some opinions from published authors or editors or agents to make sure it’s working for you.

If you’re using second person, ask yourself a few questions:

  ✓ Is there a compelling reason to use second person rather than first?

  ✓ Do you have problems getting your POV character into every scene? If so, would it make sense to use multiple third person POV characters instead?

Third person objective

Third person objective isn’t easy to do well, because you’re giving away the two main advantages that you hold over screenwriters: your ability to write interior emotion and interior monologue (see Chapter 10 for details on these two powerful tools). Therefore, this POV is technically challenging: You have to show all those thoughts and feelings of your lead character using only action, dialogue, and description. Yet the third person objective POV is doable, and it can have a cinematic feel if you do it exceptionally well.Here are some questions to ask if you’re using third person objective:

  ✓ Does your novel have a strong cinematic feel?

  ✓ Does your reader identify well with the focal character in each scene, even though you can’t use interior emotion and interior monologue?

  ✓ Are you occasionally drifting inside the character’s head, even though you intended not to? If so, would it make sense to choose third person instead so you can get inside the character intentionally rather than accidentally?

Asking whether your POV choice fits your category

Look at other recent novels in your category (anything published in the last 20 years counts as “recent”). How many of them use the POV choice you made, and how many use a different one? Do reviewers criticize them for this choice, or do they ignore it? Do online customer book reviews mention the choice of POV, and if so, what do they say about it?
  If you know some published authors in your category, ask them for their opinion on your choice of POV. Will your choice be a show-stopper for your project? (If so, then change your choice of POV, even if it seems unfair.) Will your choice be a problem for readers? (If so, then think hard about your choice, but don’t feel absolutely obligated to change.) If you can talk to editors or agents at a writing conference or elsewhere, show them a sample chapter of your manuscript and ask them whether your POV choice is going to be a problem.

Have you chosen the right POV character?

Even novels with only a single POV character may require some careful thought: which character is the best POV character for the story? For example, nearly all the Sherlock Holmes stories have Dr. Watson rather than Sherlock as the POV character. Why? Holmes has supreme confidence in his own skills and could easily come off as arrogant if he were the POV character. Because Watson frankly admits that he’s put off by Holmes’s strong ego, the reader doesn’t have to wonder whether the author knows that Holmes is conceited. Watson is then free to praise Sherlock’s more likeable features. If Holmes were the POV character, he could hardly do that without seeming even more egotistical.
  If you have a larger-than-life central character like Sherlock Holmes, you may find it useful to use a sidekick who can give you a little distance as a POV  character.
In novels with multiple POV characters, then you need to decide on a POV character for each scene. That’s a hard question, and you often can’t find any easy answers. You don’t need a sidekick, because each of the POV characters can give that objective look at the others.
  Your choice of POV character may depend on whether the scene is an active scene or a reactive scene (see Chapter 9 for a discussion of the two main kinds of scenes):

  ✓ If it’s an active scene, who has the most to lose in the scene, and who is the actual loser in the scene? These may be the same character. Either of them may make an excellent POV character, because they’re most likely to have a powerful emotional experience during the scene.

  ✓ If it’s a reactive scene, who is suffering most keenly in the reaction part of the scene, and who has the best analytical skills in the dilemma part of the scene? Again, these may be the same character. They both make good choices for the POV character. The reaction part of the scene is a great place to give your reader emotive hits; the dilemma part is a strong opportunity to get your reader inside the thought processes of the POV character.
Any of the characters in a scene is fair game to be the POV character. Consider each of them and ask which is the most entertaining choice for your reader. This is no light choice. The scene will likely have a very different feel as seen through the eyes of the different characters.

Is your POV consistent?

After you’ve decided for certain that the POV strategy you’ve chosen is the right one for your novel, you still need to make sure that you’re actually using that POV consistently throughout your story. Your reader wants to know that you aren’t going to change the rules on her. If you’re going to use first person POV for a certain character, use first person for that character everywhere in the book.
Normally, if a book is written in first person, the whole story is written in that POV, but we’ve seen novels that worked well with first person for one character and third person for the other characters. An excellent example is Diana Gabaldon’s Dragonfly in Amber.
  Consistency is important. If you’re going to use third person POV for a character in one scene, then don’t use first person or objective third person for that character in other scenes.

Does your character have a unique voice?

Some of your characters may have a unique and distinctive way of speaking and thinking, which comes across in their dialogue and interior monologue. It also flavors their observations of the other characters. You aren’t required to give your characters a strong voice (which we discuss in Chapter 10), but doing so makes your writing more compelling. Much of the charm of Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn comes from the voice of the narrator, Huck, who is none too reliable as a narrator. Huck is an innocent, ignorant country boy. The reader isn’t intended to believe everything Huck says, and the reader is expected to understand things that Huck doesn’t.
  To develop strong character voice, you need to have an ear for dialogue. Some authors do this naturally, and some don’t. The key is to listen to real people, constantly asking what makes someone’s voice unique and what it reveals about her personality. After listening to a person for a few minutes, try writing a few paragraphs that mimic her word usage, sentence structure, thought patterns, and personality (you may use some slang, but don’t overdo it). This is hard, but with practice, you can figure out how to mimic people on paper. After you’ve mastered this skill, try writing one of your characters in the voice of someone you’ve met. You may find your character coming alive as you try this.  Be wary of trying to carry too much of the story with voice. Characters with a strong voice are great, but don’t try to inject too much interior monologue to show off that voice. Even worse, don’t get sloppy and overuse narrative summary, just because you have a great narrative voice.

Fixing Broken Characters

Your characters are not written in stone. If you find a problem with one of your characters, then fix him! You can rework your characters to make them deeper, more believable, and more interesting. But first you need to diagnose the problem. This section tells you how to change boring, shallow, unbelievable, or unlikeable characters — we can guarantee you’ll have more success changing them than real people!

Boring characters

  Characters are interesting when they have a strong and compelling goal. When they lack a good goal, they’re boring. If your characters are boring, give them something to desperately want.
If it’s early in your story, your characters may not yet have a clearly defined story goal. That’s okay. Remember that your story is an interruption in the lives of your main characters. Before the story broke in on them, they were each living lives and pursuing goals. Modest goals, maybe, but they had something they wanted to do or have or become. Those modest goals keep your reader interested while you lead your character to his story goal.
In George Lucas’s Star Wars, for example, Luke Skywalker really doesn’t have a strong story goal until the very end of Act 1, when Storm Troopers murder his aunt and uncle. After that happens, his story goal gels quickly: To go with Obi-Wan Kenobi to help the Rebel Alliance. But well before the massacre at his home, Luke has been nursing a desire to go to military school and become a pilot. And he’s been following the Rebellion with keen interest, hating the Empire with a deep hatred. Luke’s hope, at the beginning of the movie, is that the new droids will free up his uncle enough so he can go for military training as soon as possible. That’s not a huge goal, but it’s enough to make Luke reasonably interesting. When he meets up with Kenobi and develops a much larger and more important goal, he becomes that much more interesting.

Shallow characters

We call characters shallow when there just isn’t much to them: when a reader can predict what they’ll do or say, when they come across as one-dimensional, or when their interests seem trivial and unimportant.

What’s the cure for a shallow character? Most of the time, the character just needs some values. Either you haven’t give the character any values at all, or you’ve given her only one. Give her another value, and make sure it’s in conflict with the first one. In some cases, the values you’ve given the character are simply shallow in themselves.
For example, say you have a major character who’s a beach bunny. All she really cares about is hanging out at the beach, working on her tan, and smiling at the surfer guys. She has only one value: “Hanging out at the beach is better than anything else in the world.” When you write it out like that, her vapidity springs into sharp relief, doesn’t it? But adding some depth to her isn’t so hard. Interview this bunny and find out what makes her tick. Why does she spend so much time at the beach?
Maybe her mother’s dead and her father’s a rageaholic. Home is a hellhole, so she escapes by going to the beach. But the beach isn’t her real value. Her real values are “Family is important to me” and “Peace and stability are important to me.” These two values create conflict for your bunny, because her family violates her peace and stability. That’s why she goes to the beach. Suddenly, Miss Beach is a bit deeper, isn’t she?

Unbelievable characters

You’ll almost always think your characters are believable, because to you, your characters are real people. So it comes as a bit of a shock when one of your critiquers insists that “Fredhelm wouldn’t torch the mayor’s house. He’s just not that kind of person.” You can argue all you want that Fredhelm really would torch the house, but if your reader doesn’t buy it, then you have a problem.
When you hear that your characters are doing something unbelievable, congratulate yourself that you’ve at least created a character who’s real enough that readers think they know what Fredhelm is actually like. That’s an accomplishment. But how do you convince your readers that Fredhelm could commit arson?

  If your characters are unbelievable, connect the dots more clearly from back-story to values to ambition to story goal. The answer is usually that you have to do one of three things:

  ✓ Make it clearer that the character’s story goal follows directly from his ambition. Is the story goal obviously the best way to achieve the ambition? Is there a simpler or more plausible way to get there?

  ✓ Make it clearer that the character’s ambition follows from at least one of his values. Which value most strongly supports his ambition? Does another value just as strongly oppose the ambition? Can you find a way to tip the balance so that the ambition seems more believable?

  ✓ Make it clearer just why the character’s values are so important to him. Do the values have a plausible explanation in the character’s backstory?

Earlier in this chapter, we discuss the curious case of Michael Corleone, an honest young man with a good future who comes from a family of gangsters. At a crucial point in the story, Michael agrees to avenge the attempted murder of his father by killing a rival Mafioso and a crooked police captain. That’s a huge change in direction for Michael, but author Mario Puzo makes it believable by laying the groundwork, showing the reader Michael’s family background, his values of family and honor, his iron will, and his ability to think like his father — “it’s not personal; it’s business.” Few readers would agree with Michael’s decision, but they believe that Michael would make it.
In some cases, after thinking hard about your character’s backstory, values, ambitions, and story goal, you may realize that she really has done something out of character. In that case, either change her actions or find yourself a new character capable of doing the job.

Unlikeable characters

Some characters are just plain unlikeable. When your test readers tell you that they don’t like a particular character, you don’t have many options. Either you can make the character more likeable, or you can make him stronger. Here’s how to fix an unlikable character:

  1.  Figure out why the character is unlikeable.

    Is he annoying? Stupid? Arrogant? Klutzy? Cruel?

  2.  Ask whether that behavior was intentional; then improve your character.

    Here’s how to fix him:

•If it was an accident, make him less annoying, stupid, arrogant, klutzy, or cruel.

• If your character is intentionally unlikeable, make him more interesting, deep, and believable (as we discuss in the three preceding sections).

Consider the assassin in Frederick Forsyth’s thriller The Day of the Jackal. By anybody’s standards, the Jackal is thoroughly unlikeable. He’s a contract assassin, hired to kill Charles de Gaulle. He casually kills a photographer who tries to blackmail him. He seduces a married woman and then murders her when she becomes inconvenient.
What makes the Jackal a compelling character? A number of things. First, he’s immensely competent, as the reader discovers when his thuggish employers interview him and he reveals that he knows more about them than they know about him. Second, he has an impossible task: to assassinate the world’s best-protected man. Third, he has a strong motivation: completing the contract will make him rich enough to quit the assassination business. Fourth, he prepares meticulously, never revealing to the reader his reasons for doing things, leaving them to puzzle out how he’s going to kill de Gaulle. Fifth, he acts decisively in the face of enormous obstacles. All these factors earn the Jackal the reader’s respect and fascination.


}
{

Chapter 13

Scrutinizing Your Story Structure

In This Chapter

Fixing common storyline problems

Analyzing the three-act structure

Using your scene list to restructure your story and write your second draft

We recommend that when you’re ready to begin editing your manuscript, you first analyze your characters (as we discuss in Chapter 12) and then analyze your story structure (the subject of this chapter). Regardless of your creative paradigm, figure out these big-picture problems with your story and fix them first, before you dive into the detailed edits (which we cover in Chapters 14 and 15). 
Story structure is nothing more than a very high-level summary of your story. In this chapter, we show you how to edit your story structure at three levels: your storyline (a one-sentence summary of your story), your three-act structure (a one-paragraph summary of your story), and your scene list (a list that summarizes every scene in your novel).
  Your storyline is a powerful selling tool that you’ll use forever in selling your story to your editor, her publishing team, the bookstore people, and readers. It’s more than just a selling tool, though — it’s also your strategic vision of what your novel is about. A good storyline radically simplifies your editing process by forcing you to define what’s important and what isn’t.
Your three-act structure allows you to map out the big pieces of your book. If you have a satisfying three-act structure, then you have a leg up on making your readers happy, because modern readers are wired to expect a three-act structure — whether they know it or not. If your three-act structure is weak or wandering, your reader may feel that the story isn’t going anywhere, even if she can’t quite explain why. It’s your job to figure out what’s wrong and make it right before your reader ever sees it.

Your scene list gives you an overview of your story and makes it easy to plan the revisions of your manuscript. You can make decisions on adding, deleting, and moving scenes using your scene list. You can also add notes to yourself on key revisions you intend to make. When you finish revising your scene list, you can use it to quickly create the second draft of your novel.

Editing Your Storyline

  We strongly believe that the very first step in editing your manuscript should be to define your strategic vision for your novel — your storyline. The storyline can guide you in every decision you make as you edit your novel. Why do you need a storyline? Because if you really understand your story, then you can boil it down to a single sentence of 25 words or less. If you can’t boil it down that far, then you don’t understand your story yet.
  Randy often runs storyline clinics online, asking his blog readers to post one-sentence summaries of their novels. Storylines of 30, 40, or even 50-plus words are common. Often these involve numerous characters and plot threads. 
Randy then challenges his blog readers to cut the fat out of these long, convoluted storylines. Sometimes the surgery gets pretty severe. When you slice a 50-word storyline down to 15 words, you’ve cut to the bone!
  Have you written your storyline yet? If not, read through the section on how to write a storyline in Chapter 8 and then write one that describes your story. Don’t read further until you do, because this section looks at some of the most common problems that we see in storylines and suggests ways to fix them. You can’t fix what you don’t have.

Removing all unnecessary weight

The purpose of the storyline is not to tell the story; the purpose of the storyline is to define the direction of the novel. Most storylines are too long, so the first question you should always ask is this: “What else can I cut out of my storyline?” Here are the three numbers we look at in a storyline:

  ✓ The number of words: If it’s more than 25, then make every possible effort to cut some words.

  ✓ The number of characters: If the storyline mentions more than three, that’s too many. Two is better than three. One may be all you need.

  ✓ The number of story threads: If it’s more than one, then strongly consider cutting it to one.

A storyline is your reader’s first contact with your story. It’s also your strategic vision of the story. Make it simple and memorable, not merely for your reader’s sake, but also for your own.

Keeping your characters anonymous

When you tell someone your storyline, it’s probably the first thing they’ve ever heard about your novel. Your hearer has no context at all for your characters, so you have to give all the context right there in the storyline. So look at your storyline and focus on the characters, describing them in a few words without telling their names.
  Giving the names of the characters in a storyline wastes words. After all, which is shorter: “Frodo the hobbit” or “a hobbit”? “Vito Corleone, godfather of a Mafia family” or “a Mafia godfather”? “Lizzie Bennet, an unmarried young woman” or “an unmarried young woman”?
  Tell your character’s uniqueness, not her name. Your storyline helps you sell the concept of your story, and unless you’re writing historical fiction with famous characters, you don’t need to give out names of characters to sell a concept. You just need one or two or a few words that define the characters. Hobbits and godfathers and unmarried young women are intrinsically interesting (to the right readers). Frodo and Vito and Lizzie are fine names, but they just aren’t that interesting without a context.

Staying focused

Trying to sneak just a bit more into a storyline is all too easy. If you have a storyline down to 13 words, you may think it really doesn’t cost you much to add five words that allude to a second plot thread or a third character. But think again. Does the addition really help? Or will it complicate things and make it easier for someone in your selling chain to bungle the message?
  An adage from writer and editor Sol Stein applies to your storyline: “One plus one equals a half.” If your storyline covers the most important plot thread in your story, then why would you want to dilute it with the second most important plot thread?

Cutting down some example storylines

You may feel that you’re writing such a complex story that you simply can’t cut your storyline down. Cut it down anyway.

Be clear about one thing: Complexity in a story is good. We’re all for complex stories — big, powerful tales that require a wide stage: fantasies like The Lord of the Rings, by J. R. R. Tolkien; thrillers like The Godfather, by Mario Puzo; timeless romances like Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen. However, each of these novels involves a central plot thread and central characters — an overall focus for the book. This section looks at each of these novels in turn and shows how to cut down a big, complex storyline into something far easier to handle.

Example: The Lord of the Rings

The Lord of the Rings is a massive story that covers hundreds of leagues of travel, scores of characters, numerous people groups, a dozen-plus languages, half a dozen sentient races, and several major plot threads. Here’s a long, convoluted storyline that still doesn’t do justice to the story:
Gandalf the wizard wants to defeat the Dark Lord Sauron for all time, so when he learns that Frodo the hobbit has Sauron’s Ring of Power, he persuades Frodo to travel to Rivendell to confer with the elf lord Elrond about how best to destroy the Ring, and the best way turns out to be to send a small party of hobbits, men, elves, and dwarves to go toward Mordor, but their team is attacked by orcs and two of the hobbits are kidnapped, forcing three of the survivors to pursue them, leaving Frodo and his servant Sam to journey on toward Mordor with the unlikely guide Gollum, who tries to betray them to Shelob while Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli fight a major battle at Helm’s Deep and then spur on the Rohirrim to go to battle in Gondor, while they themselves take the Paths of the Dead and meet them at the decisive battle that saves Gondor but nearly kills Faramir, who falls in love with Eowyn, who is in love with Aragorn, who is betrothed to Arwen, whom he can’t have until he is king, which can’t happen until Frodo destroys the Ring.

And that isn’t the half of it. That isn’t the tenth of it. We’ve used 195 words, mentioned 13 characters by name and still left out essential characters such as Merrie, Pippin, Tom Bombadil, Galadriel, Boromir, Theoden, Denethor, Treebeard, and numerous others. How can we possibly cut more?

The answer’s simple: The critical character is Frodo the hobbit. However well the other characters in the story fight their battles, all is for nothing if Frodo fails to throw the Ring of Power into the Cracks of Doom. This is Frodo’s story. Therefore, cut the storyline down to Frodo:

A hobbit learns that destroying his magic ring is the key to saving Middle Earth from the Dark Lord.
Nineteen words, two characters, one plot thread. This isn’t nearly enough to tell the story, but a storyline isn’t supposed to do that; it’s supposed to tell you what’s most important in the story. If you were J. R. R. Tolkien and your publisher demanded you cut the word count in half, this storyline would tell you what to keep and what to cut.

Example: The Godfather

The Godfather is a big story featuring dozens of characters in New York City, Las Vegas, Hollywood, and Sicily. The novel weaves together numerous story threads into a complex tapestry. Consider the following sprawling storyline:
When Don Corleone, the head of a New York Mafia family, is shot in the street and nearly killed, his middle son Freddie collapses emotionally and is shipped off to Las Vegas while his eldest son Sonny takes charge of the business and tries to beat the family enemies into submission through a war of relentless brutality until he is murdered by the opposition, while the third son Michael avenges the attempted assassination and then has to hide out in Sicily until the heat dies down and he can come back to help take over the reins of the family.
This storyline leaves out quite a number of characters — hitman Luca Brasi, Mama Corleone, Michael’s girlfriend Kay Adams, Sonny’s girlfriend Lucy Mancini, the famous singer and movie star Johnny Fontane, Johnny’s sidekick Nino Valenti, the family consigliori Tom Hagen, the twisted movie mogul Jack Woltz, the brilliant surgeon Jules Segal, Michael’s wife Appollonia, Michael’s sister Connie and her no-good husband Carlo Rizzi, and the two caporegimes, Tessio and Clemenza. Most of these are POV characters, and all of them are important to the story. We’ve left out all these vital characters, and we still have a 100-word storyline with four characters. We still have far too much. How can we possibly cut more?
That’s easy: We cut more. Only two characters are essential to our storyline — the Godfather Don Corleone and his youngest son Michael, who will replace him. Everybody else is secondary. Because Michael is the central character of the story, we focus our storyline on him:
When a Mafia godfather is shot in the streets, his youngest son quits college to avenge him.
Seventeen words, two characters, one plot thread. It’s not perfect. It can’t capture the bigness of the book; only reading it will capture that. But this storyline keeps you focused on the main story. If you had to edit the original manuscript into published form, this storyline would guide you all the way.

Example: Pride and Prejudice

Jane Austen’s novel isn’t quite as big as the examples in the preceding sections, but it’s plenty big for a romance novel, a genre that usually keeps the stage tightly focused. Take a look at a possible storyline for the novel:

When Lizzie Bennet and her sisters learn that wealthy young bachelor Mr. Bingley has moved into nearby Netherfield Hall, they hope that one of them will marry Bingley, opening the way for the other sisters to marry wealthy young men, and luckily the eldest sister Jane does catch Bingley’s eye and there are high hopes of a wedding until Bingley suddenly abandons country life for London, leaving Jane heartbroken and her sisters to pursue the likes of Mr. Wickham, a charming soldier who tells Lizzie that he’s poor on account of Bingley’s friend, the wealthy Mr. Darcy, a brusque man who shows no interest in Lizzie until he unexpectedly proposes to her, which she refuses and then begins to regret, the more so as she learns that Darcy is a far better man than Wickham, who ultimately seduces Lizzie’s youngest sister Lydia, dashing the hopes of all the sisters for marriage to decent men until Darcy steps in and solves all the problems anonymously.
Whew! That storyline is simply awful, isn’t it? It includes 164 words, features six characters by name, and covers three story threads. Again, it’s all too much. We haven’t even mentioned Mama Bennet, Papa Bennet, Mary and Kitty Bennet, Mr. Collins, Charlotte Lucas, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, Georgiana Darcy, or Colonel Fitzwilliam. We’ve said nothing about that dreaded entailment, which is the cause of the Bennet girls’ predicament. We’ve said almost nothing, yet we’ve said far too much.
The solution is to focus on the primary characters, Lizzie and Mr. Darcy, along with their story thread. Everything else has to go. Everything. All that remains is this:
A young Englishwoman from a peculiar family is pursued by an arrogant and wealthy young man.
Sixteen words, two characters, one story thread. Nothing in this storyline reveals the fact that the novel will endure for two centuries. No storyline could tell you such a thing. Don’t try to make your storyline support too much weight.
  A storyline is a sound bite, nothing more. Yet it guides your thinking through the entire revision process, so get it right before you begin detailed editing of your manuscript.

Testing Your Three-Act Structure

When you have a solid storyline, you’re ready to move on to the next step in revising your story: editing your three-act structure. In Chapter 8, we describe the three-act structure and augment it with what we call the three-disaster structure. The main ideas are these:

✓ Each act covers a long chunk of the story, and each disaster is a single point of time in the story.

  ✓ Act 1 covers roughly the first quarter of the story and introduces the main characters.

  ✓ The first disaster comes at the very end of Act 1 and forces the lead character to commit irrevocably to the story. If the main character doesn’t yet have a story goal by this point in the story, this disaster forces him to choose one.

  ✓ Act 2 covers roughly half the story and includes many obstacles and setbacks.

  ✓ The second disaster comes at the midpoint of Act 2 and solves the problem of the sagging middle by changing the direction of the story.

  ✓ The third disaster comes at the end of Act 2 and forces the lead character to commit to ending the story. Normally, this means committing to some sort of final confrontation, which appears likely to fail but may succeed. Success means that the lead character achieves his story goal; failure means he doesn’t.

  ✓ Act 3 works through the final confrontation (which includes the climax, the high point of the story and its resolution), shows the aftermath, and finally wraps things up.
If you haven’t written your three-act structure yet, now is the time to work it out for your story. Read through the section on how to write a three-act structure in Chapter 8 and then write one. (If you find your story has more than three acts, see the nearby sidebar “Handling extra acts.”)

In this section, we take you through the process of testing every aspect of your three-act structure. We do this by testing the three-act structure for The Godfather and for Pride and Prejudice — are these books up to snuff? We also include some questions to help you analyze your own story. As you answer those questions, don’t make changes yet — simply make notes for the changes you want to make; then make all your structural changes at once. At the end of this chapter, we discuss writing your second draft.
  You may wonder whether your secondary story threads should also have a three-act structure. They can, and analyzing your other story threads using the three-act structure often makes sense. Don’t feel obligated to make the three disasters of each story thread all fall at the same time as the corresponding disasters in the main story. The timing of the three disasters that we give is only an approximation.

What are your three disasters?

Your first step is to identify your three disasters — one that makes the main character commit to the story, one that changes the direction of the story, and one that forces the final confrontation.
Here’s our analysis of the three-act structure for The Godfather, with the three disasters in italics:
When Mafia godfather Vito Corleone is nearly killed by his enemy Virgil Sollozzo, the powerful Corleone Family is thrown into chaos. Vito’s youngest son Michael, a goody-goody college boy, avenges the hit by killing Sollozzo and his police guardian, but then Michael is forced to flee the country. Sonny Corleone, Michael’s oldest brother, wages war on the other Five Families for months, until at last his enemies catch Sonny in the open and murder him. Hiding in Sicily, Michael falls in love and marries a local girl, who dies in an assassination attempt aimed at him. At last, Michael comes home, becomes the new godfather of the Corleone family, and finds a brutally effective way to make a lasting peace with his enemies.

Here’s our analysis of the three-act structure for Pride and Prejudice (from Chapter 8), with the disasters in italics:

When Lizzie Bennet and her sisters meet some wealthy young men at a ball, Lizzie takes a keen dislike to one of them, Mr. Darcy. Lizzie’s sister Jane falls in love with Darcy’s friend Mr. Bingley and Lizzie takes an interest in Mr. Wickham — whom she then learns has been financially ruined by Darcy. When Lizzie visits her married friend in Hunsford some months later, Mr. Darcy seeks her out and proposes marriage to her, but she rejects him flat out. Lizzie soon learns that Darcy is a better man than she thought, and she is beginning to regret her rejection when her sister Lydia runs away to live in sin with Mr. Wickham. When Lizzie learns that Mr. Darcy rescued her sister’s reputation and when he learns that she no longer hates him, the two realize that they were made for each other.Now check out some diagnostic tests on these three-act structures.

Are your acts balanced in length?

  The three disasters mark the end of Act 1 and the middle and end of Act 2. Your reader has certain expectations on the length of the various acts:

  ✓ The first act should cover roughly the first quarter of the story.

  ✓ The second act should take up about half the story.

  ✓ The third act should cover the final quarter.

These are approximations. Many excellent stories bend these guidelines quite a bit.

Noting act length in The Godfather and Pride and Prejudice

The Godfather is internally divided into seven books of unequal length. Our edition of the novel has 446 pages. Act 1 ends on page 153, about a third of the way into the story, and Act 2 ends on page 354. So Act 1 is quite a bit longer than usual, whereas Act 2 and Act 3 are both quite a bit shorter than is common. The reason for this is simple: The Godfather is a very complex book with many characters. Setting up this chessboard takes quite a few pages. The ending is short, because most of the story threads are wrapped up earlier, leaving only the main thread (Michael’s story) to resolve.
Pride and Prejudice is a book of 61 chapters, with 332 pages in our edition. The first act goes through Chapter 16, which ends on page 73, roughly a fifth of the way into the novel. The second act goes through chapter 46, which ends on page 237, nearly three-quarters of the way through the book. The acts are therefore very well balanced, but the ending is a bit longer than normal. The reason the ending needs to be longer than usual is that Austen must wrap up several major story threads, which are all strongly tied to each other — first the thread with Lydia and Wickham, then the thread with Jane and Bingley, and finally the thread with Lizzie and Darcy. Each story thread demands substantial page count to wind down.

Checking the balance of acts in your story

  Look at the three-act structure for your novel and answer these diagnostic questions:

  ✓ Are you comfortable with the relative lengths of the acts?

  ✓ Are any of your acts substantially longer or shorter than normal? If the act lengths are abnormally proportioned, do you have a good reason for it?

  ✓ Would it make sense to substantially cut or add pages in one of the acts? 

  ✓ Would it make sense to move either the first disaster or the third disaster to get more normal proportions for the acts?

Make notes for yourself on any structural changes you think you may need to make for your story, but don’t make any changes yet! You still have plenty of other things to think about. You address the balance of acts in the later  section “Scene List: Analyzing the Flow of Scenes.”

The beginning: Does it  accelerate the story?

Your beginning — Act 1 — begins with the reader knowing nothing about your characters, their backstories, values, ambitions, and story goals. However,  you can’t bog down your story by spending the first 50 pages bringing the reader up to speed on on all that. You need to start your story with motion on page one. 
  Your story doesn’t have to be moving very fast at first, nor does it have to be going in the “right direction.” It just needs to be moving in some clear direction. As Act 1 continues, you accelerate the story and change direction as your lead character’s story goal comes into focus. By the end of Act 1, you need to be heading at full speed in the right direction.

Looking at acceleration in the example novels

The Godfather begins with the wedding of Vito Corleone’s daughter. Readers meet many characters in this wedding, all of them important to the story. Shortly after the wedding, Corleone rejects a business proposal from Sollozzo, making him an enemy. Not long afterward, Corleone is nearly murdered in the streets, and already the story is running at full speed. The acceleration is very fast, but it’s smooth and clean.

Pride and Prejudice begins with the news that Mr. Bingley has leased Netherfield Hall and with Mrs. Bennet’s insisting to her husband that they simply must meet the young man so that he can fall in love with one of their five daughters. Within a few pages, the young women have met Bingley and his friend Darcy at a local ball. Bingley is a hit with the Bennets, and Darcy is off to a horrid start. By page 10, Austen has hit her stride and the story is well-launched.

Checking your own beginning

  Read through the first five chapters of your story and consider these diagnostic questions:

  ✓ How many pages of backstory do you have in the beginning of your story? How much narrative summary? If the answer surprises you, can you reduce backstory and narrative summary in the first five chapters?

  ✓ How many pages must the reader work through to meet all the key players? Would it make sense to introduce these characters earlier?

  ✓ Does the lead character have some sort of goal right away, even if it’s not the ultimate story goal of the story?

The first disaster: Is the call  to action clear?

Your reader wants to know that your characters are truly committed to the story. The lead character may well know his story goal early on, but usually that story goal is not yet fire-tested. That changes at the first disaster at the end of Act 1. If it’s a real disaster, it’s going to force the lead character to rethink things. Just how badly does he want what he thinks he wants?
  A good first disaster makes the lead character commit by presenting him with a choice between backing out or going on with the story. In short, the first disaster gives the lead character a call to action.

Committing Michael Corleone and Mr. Darcy to the story

In The Godfather, Michael Corleone’s call to action actually comes before his first disaster — at the meeting of the Family when he volunteers to kill Virgil Sollozzo and his renegade cop bodyguard. This is out of character for Michael, but it’s believable because the reader has seen that Michael is truly his father’s son. From Michael’s point of view, his decision is not mere personal vengeance; it’s sound business logic. Somebody needs to kill Sollozzo, and the only person who can get close enough is the seemingly innocent Michael. Michael could walk away from his family; until now, he’s held them at a distance. Now he chooses to join his fate with theirs, and this decision is irrevocable, because it includes killing a uniformed cop.
In Pride and Prejudice, the first disaster comes on Lizzie’s hearing from Mr. Wickham that he’s been ruined by Mr. Darcy. This is a lie, but Lizzie doesn’t know it and Darcy isn’t yet aware of the rumor. But soon thereafter at Mr. Bingley’s ball, Darcy asks Lizzie to dance, and she’s as rude as she can be behind a mask of politeness. Darcy is already in love with Lizzie, but she doesn’t know it yet, and he’s far too wary of gossip to tell Lizzie what a cad Wickham really is. His call to action is clear: If he doesn’t ramp up his pursuit of Lizzie, a scoundrel like Wickham may get her. But Darcy will be fighting this battle with one hand tied behind his back, because he can’t humiliate his sister Georgiana by exposing Wickham as the scoundrel who nearly seduced her.

Presenting your call to action
 
Read the chapter containing your first disaster, which ends Act 1. Think hard about these questions and take some notes:

  ✓ Does your disaster come bundled with a call to action — a demand for a commitment to the story goal?

  ✓ What are the risks of your call to action? What are the rewards? Can you raise the stakes by increasing either the risks or the rewards?

  ✓ Why can’t your lead character refuse the call to action? What in his backstory, his values, or his ambition forces him to commit to the story? 

Have you developed that reason enough so that your reader will believe your lead character’s decision to commit to the story? (For details on character motivation, see Chapter 12.)

The second disaster: Does it  support the long middle?

Act 2 of your story — the middle — is the longest act, and therefore it’s the most susceptible to settling into a dull routine that may lose your reader’s interest. Your lead character will have setbacks and minor victories, but after a while, they may start all melding together. By the middle of Act 2, your reader wants and needs a change of pace. That’s why you need a second disaster.

The second disaster needs to be big, and it needs to change the direction of the story. It may be a surprise, or it may be merely the plausible result of your lead character’s decision to take risks.

Changing direction in The Godfather and Pride and Prejudice

In The Godfather, the lead character Michael is hidden safely away in Sicily. Life goes on in the U.S., but the Corleone family is on a long slide toward oblivion under the not-so-great leadership of the eldest brother, Sonny. He’s a brutal killer, lacking the cunning and finesse of his father. Just past the midpoint of the book, one of Don Corleone’s clients, an undertaker named Amerigo Bonasera, receives a request from the Don for a favor. Bonasera goes to his funeral parlor and receives the Don . . . who’s brought the savagely shot up body of Sonny Corleone. It’s a shock to the reader, but it’s necessary, because it makes clear that Michael Corleone must come home to take the reins of  the family.
In Pride and Prejudice, Lizzie Bennet is visiting her friend Charlotte, who has married Lizzie’s boring cousin, Mr. Collins. Collins is a sycophant to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, the aunt of Mr. Darcy, who is visiting her. Lizzie hates having to see Darcy, and she assumes he despises her. Precisely at the middle of the story, Lizzie is thrown for a knockout, along with the reader, when Darcy proposes to her. His proposal is clumsy, patronizing, and insulting. She’s blunt and insulting in her refusal, apparently burning all her bridges. But her refusal is a turning point for Darcy, because he now sees himself for what he is. Darcy realizes that he needs an attitude adjustment. Is he man enough to make it?

Considering your own second disaster

  Read the chapter containing your second disaster. Then answer these questions in your notes:

  ✓ Is your disaster roughly in the middle of the story? If not, would it make sense to move things around to put it more in the middle?

  ✓ Is this disaster the worst thing to happen so far in the story? If not, can you make it worse?

  ✓ Does the disaster create a turning point, forcing some important internal change in your lead characters or some change of plans on how to reach their story goals?

  ✓ Is the disaster as surprising as possible? Can you make it more surprising without ruining its plausibility?

The third disaster: Does it  force the ending?

The purpose of Act 2 is to delay the ending by giving your lead character a series of obstacles and setbacks. This builds tension as the reader worries more and more about whether the lead character can ever reach his story goal. The purpose of your third disaster is to force your lead character to switch into his endgame. He must make a decision to pursue some action or some final confrontation that will end in either total victory or total defeat. No more dithering!

Leading to final confrontations in the example novels

In The Godfather, Don Corleone reacts to the death of Sonny by apparently throwing in the towel. He calls a meeting of the leaders of the Five Families and makes an end of hostilities. He agrees to the request that caused the war — he’ll provide political and legal cover for their drug-smuggling enterprise. He vows to forego vengeance for Sonny’s murder but warns that he will tolerate no assault on his youngest son Michael, whom he still hopes to bring back to America. Meanwhile, in Sicily, Michael has married a local girl and is living in newlywed bliss. He and his wife decide to switch to a new location where he’ll be less known. But on the day they’re to leave, a car bomb intended for him kills his wife. It’s another shocking disaster, and it raises a question: How will the Corleones respond to this violation of the Godfather’s one condition for a truce?
In Pride and Prejudice, Mr. Darcy responds to Lizzie’s cold refusal of his proposal by writing her a letter telling the truth about Mr. Wickham. Over the rest of Act 2, Lizzie’s eyes slowly open to the truth that Darcy is a man of character — a man who does not gossip about others, who is warm and true to his friends, a man who loves art and inspires love in those who know him best. What was she thinking to refuse him? A chance meeting between her and Darcy leads to enormous awkwardness. Both of them have changed, but how can they return to where they were before the disastrous proposal? It seems impossible. Then word arrives that Mr. Wickham has run off with Lizzie’s youngest sister Lydia — without a marriage license. Now Lizzie must return home to a family disgraced and destroyed. Darcy feels responsible, because he has kept Wickham’s deceit silent to protect the reputation of his sister Georgiana. Can Darcy do anything to make amends?

Evaluating your third disaster

  Read the chapter containing your third disaster, which marks the end of Act 2. Consider these questions:

✓ Is this disaster unexpected and yet plausible? If the reader could’ve seen it coming, can you tweak your story a bit to make it more of a shock? If it’s not quite believable, can you lay in a bit more foreshadowing to make the reader accept it more easily? (For more on foreshadowing, see the later section titled “Foreshadowing: Planting clues to prepare your readers.”)

  ✓ Is this disaster the worst in the story so far? Does the disaster make the situation appear to be hopeless? Can you make this dark moment even darker for your lead character?

  ✓ Does the disaster force the lead character to pursue some all-or-nothing course of action that will lead to an ending? Or could your lead character walk away and do nothing? If so, can you box him in tighter so that he has no option but to risk everything on one last desperate throw?

The ending: Does it leave your  reader wanting to tell others?

You aren’t required to make your reader like your ending; the reader reads your story because the beginning was enticing and the middle kept her engrossed. Plenty of books end with a thud, including many bestsellers and classics. But the ending is the last thing your reader reads before she returns to daily life and her friends. If your ending satisfies her, then she’ll talk you up. If it doesn’t, she won’t. Your best marketing plan is to write a great ending, because it encourages word-of-mouth, which is the most powerful marketing force in the universe.
In Chapter 8, we discuss the three kinds of endings: happy, unhappy, and  bittersweet. Any of these can be a great ending, depending on what kind of book you’re writing. Don’t assume that a happy ending will be the one that satisfies your reader most. Don’t assume that you have to kick your reader in the teeth with an unhappy ending to be appropriately artsy. Your ending should fit your story. Your lead character needs to get what he deserves, in  a way the reader doesn’t expect.

Wrapping up the example novels

In The Godfather, Vito Corleone at last finds a way to bring his son Michael home while evading the electric chair that the system has waiting for him. So Michael is off the hook. And yet, somebody tried to assassinate Michael in Sicily — who did it? How will Michael and Vito respond? Can Michael ever live and work in America when the truce has been violated by the Five Families? Is Michael a man like his father, a brute like his brother Sonny, or a wimp like his brother Freddie?

If you’ve read the book, you know that the ending fits the story perfectly: After his father dies of a stroke, Michael takes the reins of the family, lulls his enemies into complacence with a show of weakness, and then orders a series of hits that avenge his dead wife and make him the most powerful man in the New York underworld. In ordering a hit on his own brother-in-law, Michael proves he’s even more ruthless than his father. It’s a bittersweet ending. Michael has achieved his story goal — at the cost of searing his conscience. He’s achieved greatness but lost his goodness, and that’s enough to make you grab your friends and tell them, “I just read the most amazing book . . .”
In Pride and Prejudice, Lizzie Bennet is astonished when her uncle somehow rescues the situation. Her sister Lydia and Wickham are found; Wickham’s debts are cleared; they’re married, erasing the family disgrace that would’ve prevented the older sisters from marrying. And yet, there’s something odd about the whole thing. When Mr. Bingley returns to court Lizzie’s sister Jane, Lizzie puts aside her thoughts about this strange turn of luck. If only she’d been less rude when Mr. Darcy proposed to her so many months ago, her own future might be as bright. Darcy is a far better man than she’d ever dreamed, but he’s beyond her reach. Or is he?
When Darcy’s aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, arrives at Lizzie’s home, furious about a strange rumor that Lizzie has set her cap on Darcy, Lizzie can only wonder where such a rumor came from, but she refuses to deny it. Lady Catherine is outraged, and her account of Lizzie’s impudence gives Darcy the hope he needs to propose to Lizzie once again. If you like that sort of thing, it’s a happy ending that can make you tell a few friends — and for the last couple of centuries, a fair few million readers have liked that sort of thing.

Assessing your own ending

  Read the entire ending of your story — all of Act 3 — and think about these questions:

  ✓ Does your lead character reach some final confrontation that focuses the story tension to a peak?

  ✓ Is the resolution of your story happy, unhappy, or bittersweet? Is this ending an acceptable one for the category of book you’re writing?

•If it’s a happy ending, can you make the victory more complete?

•If it’s an unhappy ending, can you make the defeat more terrible?

•If it’s bittersweet, can you sharpen the contrast?

  ✓ Does your ending fit your story? Does your lead character get what he deserves? Is it surprising?

  ✓ What particular feature of your ending may encourage your reader to tell a few friends? Can you strengthen this feature? If it isn’t there, can you work one in without sacrificing your artistic integrity?

Scene List: Analyzing the Flow of Scenes

After you have a solid storyline and you’ve nailed down your three-act structure, we recommend that you analyze your scenes to make sure they’re all working well together. A scene list shows you at a glance every scene in your novel. If you haven’t written a scene list yet, see Chapter 9 for help in creating one. It doesn’t take long, and you’ll find it a powerful tool in editing the middle layers of your plot.
In this section, we talk about how to revise your scene list — reordering, adding, deleting, and retargeting scenes — so that you can edit the scenes as quickly as possible (we talk about editing the scenes themselves in Chapters 14 and 15). We also discuss foreshadowing and explain how to use your scene list to quickly create the second draft of your novel with all the large-scale revisions.

Rearranging your scenes
  The first thing to do is to make sure that your scene list has an entry for every scene in your manuscript. We recommend using either a spreadsheet or 3-x-5 cards to make a scene list. Each entry should have one to three sentences that summarize the scene. Ask these diagnostic questions:

  ✓ Are the three main disasters about equally spaced through the story? Scan your scene list and identify the three scenes that contain the three disasters of your three-act structure. Mark these scenes in some way (for example, color these three lines of your scene list in a spreadsheet or mark 3-x-5 cards with a red pen). Are you happy with the spacing of these disasters? If not, can you move some of the other scenes around to make the spacing more pleasing? Can you add or delete new scenes?

  ✓ If you’re using multiple POV characters, do some of them get too much air time while others get too little? If you color-code each POV character, you can see at a glance how many scenes each character has the POV. Expect that each lead character will be the POV character more often than the minor characters. If you see patterns you don’t like, can you change the POV character for some scenes to get a nicer distribution? (For tips on choosing a POV character, see Chapter 12.)

  ✓ Does the story logic work for each thread of the story? If not, can you add, delete, or reorder scenes to make the logic work better? Does the timeline make sense?

  ✓ How does the emotional intensity of your scenes vary? Not all scenes need to be equally intense; that would bore your reader. You need to establish a rhythm in emotional intensity for your scenes. Each scene should reach the level of intensity appropriate for its place in the story.

If it falls short of that intensity, consider a new placement for that scene or look for ways to increase that scene’s emotional punch (see Chapters 14 and 15 for tips on editing scenes).

  ✓ Can you add suspense by delaying a scene? Can you withhold information from a character by removing him from certain critical scenes?
We find that working with a scene list helps make the revision process go much more smoothly. Moving lines around in a spreadsheet is much easier than cutting and pasting multi-page scenes in a word processor.

Foreshadowing: Planting clues  to prepare readers

You must walk a fine line between making your three main disasters believable and making them surprising. That’s hard, because the reader may see a believable disaster coming long in advance. On the other hand, the reader may think that a surprising disaster is just a bit too unbelievable. The same is true of your story’s climax, or resolution, which should also be both believable and surprising.
  One key to striking a good balance between surprise and believability is to foreshadow your disasters and story climax long in advance by throwing in small clues and other bits of information that the reader may overlook. When you spring a surprise twist, your reader will instantly realize that she should’ve seen it coming, because you gave her all the information she needed. Your scene list is an ideal way to keep track of these clues and hints.For example, if you were writing Pride and Prejudice, you’d want to make the third disaster as believable as possible (Mr. Wickham persuades 15-year-old Lydia to run off with him to live in sin) and yet still be a surprise. If Jane Austen had a spreadsheet with a list of scenes, she could’ve added notes to herself to insert the following clues into specific scenes:

  ✓ Show Lydia going gaga over officers early in the book.

  ✓ Include a scene showing Lydia dancing with Wickham at a party.

  ✓ In Mr. Darcy’s letter to Lizzie revealing that Wickham tried to elope with Georgiana Darcy, add a comment that she was 15.

  ✓ In some other scene, mention in passing that Lydia is 15.Of course, you don’t need a scene list to remember to insert all these clues.  

A scene list is simply a convenient way to decide where to put the clues when you’re getting ready to edit your manuscript. The scene list shows you your story at a glance, helping you space out the bits and pieces of foreshadowing as widely as possible.

Putting it all together as a second draft

  If you’ve revised your scene list, you’re now ready to make the first real set of edits to your manuscript. We assume you have your entire manuscript in one single document in your word processor. If you don’t, then you can modify the steps here to create one document that contains the entire second draft of your novel. Work through the following steps:

  1.  Make a copy of your document, giving it a new name that tells you it’s the second draft.

    If your original document was named “MyNovel.doc,” then you can name your new copy something like “MyNovel2.doc.” Keep your original in a safe place. From now on, work only on the second draft.

  2.  If you’ve deleted scenes from your scene list, delete the corresponding scenes in your new document.

    We discuss deleting scenes in Chapter 14.

  3.  If you’ve added scenes to your scene list, make notes at the appropriate places in your new document.

    Adding a sentence or two in square brackets explaining what should happen in the new scene is enough. You don’t have to write the new scene yet, but you can if you want to. 

  4.  If you’ve moved scenes in your scene list, cut and paste the corresponding scenes into their new locations in the new document.

  5.  If you’ve marked any scenes for major revisions, insert a note in square brackets at the beginning of the scene that explains what changes need to go into the scene.

    You don’t need to make these changes yet.

  6.  If you haven’t yet written all your new scenes, write them now.

    Your second draft is now complete.

  7.  Make a new copy of your document to serve as the third draft of your novel.

    Give it a name something like “MyNovel3.doc.” Congratulations! You’re now ready to edit each scene in your third-draft document, using the methods we explain in Chapters 14 and 15.

MARGINALIA:

Handling extra acts

You may wonder what to do if your story doesn’t have only three acts. What if it has four? Or five? Or twenty? Remember that the three-act structure is popular because it works, but it’s not the only possible high-level structure for a story. If your story structure works, then it works. If you have a four-act structure, then your four acts may be equal in length. If so, then your Acts 2 and 3 are nothing more than what we’ve been calling Act 2 here, and your Act 4 is what we’ve been calling Act 3. That’s just a difference in terminology.
However, if you have a five-act structure, then that may well be fundamentally different from a three-act structure. That’s fine, so long as it works. If thinking of your story as a three-act structure doesn’t make sense, then don’t. If you have a twenty-act structure, then we suspect you’ve spread your story too thin. If you look hard, you can probably clump those acts into three big chunks, with major disasters at the usual places for a three-act structure.


}
{

Chapter 14

Editing Your Scenes for Structure

In This Chapter

Deciding which scenes need fixing

Fixing proactive and reactive scenes

Cutting unsalvageable scenes


After you’ve verified that your characters are solid (see Chapter 12) and you’ve made your storyline, three-act structure, and scene list as strong as possible (see Chapter 13), you’re ready to edit the structure of every scene of your novel. The basic unit of fiction is the scene, so getting its structure right is critical. Your novel may have 50 to 100 scenes or even more, and all your scenes are important. They all need to contribute to your story.
In this chapter, we give you some specific diagnostic questions to ask about the two fundamental kinds of scenes: proactive scenes and reactive scenes. Each question exposes a particular kind of problem, and for each problem type, we suggest a plan of attack to fix it.
Examples are important, so this chapter also shows you some examples of broken scenes and how to buff them into shape. We don’t care to embarrass other authors by pulling up scenes from published novels that we consider weak and trying to fix them; instead, we’ve looked through published novels for strong scenes. Then we imagined hypothetical earlier versions of those scenes that have problems of our own devising. We tell you how you can go about fixing those hypothetical problems. Finally, we sketch out how the author actually wrote the scene in the real novel.
If you decide that a scene can’t be fixed, then you have to put it out of its misery. Be merciless with scenes you can’t save and gentle with those you can.
Note that this chapter deals only with structural problems; the next chapter explains how to fix problems in action, dialogue, and the other tools you use to create scenes. We recommend that you fix the structural problems in all your scenes first.

Triage: Deciding Whether to Fix, Kill,  or Leave a Scene Alone

Editing scene structure begins with a process we call triage. To triage your scenes, you read each scene, analyze its structure, and make one of three decisions:

  ✓ The structure works. Don’t mess with it.

  ✓ The structure doesn’t work, but it can be fixed. Revise it.

  ✓ The structure doesn’t work, and it’s never going to work. Kill it.

In Chapter 9, we describe the two types of scene structures: proactive (which follows the pattern goal, conflict, and setback) and reactive (which follows the pattern reaction, dilemma, and decision). In this section, we help you determine whether the structure of a scene works.

Identifying ailing scenes

  Here are some basic diagnostic questions that you should ask of every scene. Before you ask these questions, read through the scene carefully. Don’t skim. Read at your normal pace without editing or making any notes. Then ask the following:

  ✓ Has your POV character moved closer to her story goal in this scene or been pushed further away from it?

  ✓ Is your POV character better off or worse off at the end of the scene?

  ✓ If you were reading this story for the first time, would you feel compelled to turn the page to find out what happens next?

We say that a scene’s structure works if the scene has moved the story forward. If you answered yes to any of these diagnostic questions, then the structure of your scene likely works. If you answered yes to all three, then you can be pretty sure it works.
If your scene’s structure works, then leave it alone. We don’t mean that you’ll never edit this scene; we mean you should leave the structure of the scene alone. Chapter 15 shows you how to edit it for dialogue, action, and more.

If the scene’s structure doesn’t work, then your life is considerably more complicated. The real question is why the scene doesn’t work. Here are the most common structural problems:

  ✓ The scene is neither a proactive scene nor a reactive scene. 

  ✓ The scene is supposed to be a proactive scene, but some of its parts (goal, conflict, or setback) are missing or weak.

  ✓ The scene is supposed to be a reactive scene, but some of its parts (reaction, dilemma, or decision) are missing or weak.

Evaluating a scene’s chances of recovery

If you do have a structural problem with the scene, then you still need to decide whether to fix it or kill it.
  Think hard about how to fix a scene before you declare it dead. Only if the scene is an incorrigible, hopeless drain on your story should you kill it. Consider the following questions to help you decide whether you can fix the problem:

  ✓ What changed in the scene? If nothing changed, and if there’s no chance of anything changing, then this scene is in big, big trouble. Why would you have a scene in which nothing changes? We’re going to guess you put it in there to feed a big lump of backstory to your reader. If so, do you really need all that backstory? Is it necessary in order to drive the story, or is it merely information that your reader could live without?

  ✓ Does the scene offer new information to your characters, or is it just new to your readers? If it’s not new to your characters, then look for a way to make it new and interesting to at least one of them:

•Can you find a way to turn that new information into bad news for a character? If so, that’s a setback, which is a terrific way to end a proactive scene.

•Is there a way to use that new information to help a character move toward her story goal? If so, that’s a decision, which is a terrific way to end a reactive scene.

✓ Does the scene end with either a setback or a decision? If not, then the scene fits neither of the standard patterns — proactive scenes or reactive scenes. That’s probably why you feel it isn’t working. Can you imagine a way to add either a setback or a decision at the end of the scene? Would that amp up the emotional effect of the scene?

If a scene looks fixable, see the upcoming sections “Fixing Proactive Scenes” and “Fixing Reactive Scenes” for some guidance on strengthening your scene. If you can’t find a way to introduce change into your scene, preferably as either a setback or a decision, you may have to kill the scene. We discuss unfixable scenes later in “Killing an Incurable Scene.”

Fixing Proactive Scenes

  A proactive scene needs to involve a goal, a conflict, and a setback. Ask yourself the following questions to find ways to strengthen a proactive scene:

  ✓ Do you clearly define a goal at the beginning of the scene? Is the goal simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult (see Chapter 9 for details on these criteria)? If it fails in any of these, can you find a way to make it so?

  ✓ Is the main part of the scene directed toward achieving that goal? Does the POV character meet resistance? Every proactive scene needs conflict — repeated steps toward the goal, with each attempt hitting resistance. Is the resistance in your scene weak, making the scene boring? Does your character get what he wants too easily? Can you think of ways to firm up the resistance? Can you make life tougher for your POV character?

   Is the length of the scene appropriate to its importance? Should you shorten it or lengthen it?

  ✓ Does your scene end in a strong setback? Is the setback a complete reversal of the goal? Does it leave the POV character in a worse situation than if he’d never pursued that goal in the first place? Can you tweak your goal for this scene so that the setback fits it better?

In this section, we start with a flawed example scene and show you how asking diagnostic questions can help you fix a proactive scene.

Imagining a proactive scene:  

The Day of the Jackal

The example we take is a hypothetical proactive scene set early in the thriller The Day of the Jackal, by Frederick Forsyth. (We know, of course, that Forsyth based his actual scene on a real historical event, so we aren’t trying to reconstruct how he actually came to write his scene; our purpose here is to show how you can take a weak, spineless scene and give it bones and muscle by asking the right questions.)

Here, in summary form, is how our imaginary flawed version of this scene runs: A dozen Frenchmen are standing beside a busy street in Paris on August 22, 1962. It’s a bit past 8 p.m. and dusk has fallen. Visibility is poor, but the roar of two Citroën cars and several police motorcycles catches the attention of the characters. They turn and see the motorcade of President Charles de Gaulle flash past.
The men beside the road are angry when they see de Gaulle. All of them are veterans of the Algerian War, and all feel betrayed by de Gaulle’s violation of his campaign promises to keep Algeria. They spend a few minutes cursing de Gaulle’s name and then head off to the local tavern to drown their sorrows  in beer.

Checking for change

What’s wrong with the structure of the hypothetical scene in the preceding section? Everything! Nothing changes here. Our characters are neither better off nor worse off at the end of the scene. The 12 Frenchmen hate de Gaulle at the beginning of the scene, and they hate him at the end.The reason nothing changes is that our characters come into the scene without any particular goal. Because they have no goal, they do nothing about their rage, other than vent a few curses. Although this may be the way you’d behave toward some hated political figure, it makes terrible fiction. Nothing happens. This scene doesn’t work.
You may complain that no writer would ever write a scene like this. Surely a writer has some purpose going into every scene, right? The answer is no, not always. For many writers, the joy of fiction is discovering where the story is going as they write it. If they don’t get it right on the first draft, then they need to fix it in the editing stage.
How can we make our hypothetical scene work? We’ll consider our diagnostic questions and see whether we can improve it.

Choosing a powerful goal

For a proactive scene, first consider the characters’ goal. Is a goal clearly defined at the beginning of the scene? Is that goal simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult? If not, can you make it so?

Our characters don’t have any goal at the beginning of the example scene, but we can easily give them one. What goal might these gentlemen choose? To shake their fists at a motorcade? To yell insults at a man who can’t hear them? No and no. Those are insignificant goals, unworthy of our attention. We need to give them a big goal, the biggest we can imagine. Shoot for the moon here. The goal we’ll give them is to assassinate Charles de Gaulle. This is pretty extreme, but our characters are men of strong passions. Extreme goals make good thrillers. Now check to see whether this goal meets our requirements:

  ✓ Is it simple? Yes. Simple means that explaining the goal is simple. The reader needs no complex proofs that a bullet to the brain will kill a man.

  ✓ Is it objective? Yes. At the end of the scene, de Gaulle will be either dead or alive. Any observer will be able to tell whether he is or isn’t.

  ✓ Is it worthwhile? Yes, in the minds of our characters. This is a key point.
   Your reader doesn’t need to believe that the goal is worthwhile; the reader only needs to believe that your characters think the goal is worthwhile.

  ✓ Is it achievable? Yes. Charles de Gaulle is mortal. Shoot him enough times, and he’ll die. Note: You may argue that this isn’t achievable, because the reader knows that de Gaulle wasn’t assassinated in 1962. True, but the reader is always willing to suspend disbelief and consider an alternate history of events.
  ✓ Is it difficult to achieve? Yes. The French security forces are well-trained, tough, and disciplined. Getting to de Gaulle is not going to be as easy as a tiptoe through the Tuileries.
As a result of setting up a clearly defined goal, the scene must become a bit longer. The beginning of the scene won’t merely show the men standing on a street corner doing nothing; it’ll show them moving into position according to a plan they’ve spent months rehearsing.

Stretching out the conflict

Suppose we’ve rewritten our hypothetical scene with a new and improved goal as follows: Our intended assassins wait for de Gaulle’s motorcade to come by. They’ve planned everything meticulously. They have a lookout on station to signal them when de Gaulle’s Citroën is getting close. They have a team of riflemen on foot to stop de Gaulle’s car in a barrage of bullets. They have other men ready to swoop in by car to administer the coup de grâce. They have getaway cars and an exit strategy. The plan goes off perfectly. The men kill de Gaulle and then stroll away to the nearest tavern, where their joyful countrymen buy them drinks until the wee hours.

What’s wrong with this scene? From a structural point of view, the gaping problem is that there’s no conflict. Take a look at our diagnostic questions: Does the POV character meet resistance? Is it too easy for your character to get what he wants? Can you make life tougher for your POV character? This scene has gone far too easily for our assassins. The solution is simple: We need to make the plan go awry. The killers have made meticulous plans, but even so, something must go wrong. Then more things have to go wrong, and more. Conflict needs to go on and on until the scene is over. Our characters won’t face just one obstacle; they’ll face several.
Say we design some conflict into this scene. First, the assassins fail to anticipate how dark it’ll be when de Gaulle’s car arrives at their killing zone. Their lookout fails to see the motorcade approaching in the dusk until it’s passing by, so he fails to send the signal.
That’s an obstacle, but it’s not enough. Our characters don’t slink away when things get tough. Even though they’ve missed the signal and are caught unprepared, the instant they see de Gaulle’s car, they begin firing anyway, taking as many shots as they can while the motorcade flashes past. They’re marksmen, and some of their bullets hit the car and shred the tires.
That’s conflict, but it’s still not enough. French security forces don’t take all those bullets lying down. De Gaulle’s driver takes evasive action as he’s trained to do. His bodyguards begin shooting back. On and on the action goes, as each side makes desperate moves. The second team of killers in cars takes their shots at de Gaulle. His driver evades again, while the security men fight back. We show all this conflict detail, instant by instant as it unfolds.

Desperately seeking setbacks

Say that we’ve rewritten our hypothetical scene as we detail in the two  preceding sections: Our dozen assassins have made a careful plan to kill Charles de Gaulle. However, they’ve failed to take account of the timing for dusk, so they’re caught unprepared. They fire anyway, shredding the tires of the presidential car. French security forces fire back, and a massive gun battle follows. De Gaulle’s car is disabled and rolls to a halt. The leader of  the assassination team fires his last bullet and kills de Gaulle.
Now what’s wrong with this scene? The structural problem is that our characters get what they want. Nothing could make them happier than what they achieve, so the novel is over on page 10. Does that strike you as a wee bit early?

Look over our diagnostic questions: Does your scene end in a strong setback? Is the setback a complete reversal of the goal? Does it leave the POV character in a worse situation than if he’d never pursued that goal in the first place?
  Early in the story, characters don’t need a victory; they need a setback. They need a major failure. They need a reason to come back and fight again in the next chapter, and the next, and the next, all the way to the end of the book. 

Early successes make dull stories. Early setbacks make exciting ones.

The solution is to have de Gaulle survive this attempt but also to let the assassins escape in the confusion, furious at themselves and determined to do better next time. That’s a complete reversal of their goal. They’re worse off than they were at the beginning of the scene, because now French security is after them with all its fury. The intended assassins are now men on the run.

Examining the final result

Here’s how the scene actually plays out in the novel: The assassins have a lookout posted 100 yards up the avenue to signal them by waving a newspaper when de Gaulle’s Citroën DS approaches. That should give the gunmen several seconds to concentrate their firepower on the car.
The flaw in their plan comes when they consult the table for dusk for the previous year, 1961, rather than for the current year, 1962. In 1961, dusk on August 22 fell at 8:35 p.m. But in 1962, it falls 25 minutes earlier, at 8:10 p.m. (Forsyth doesn’t explain the astronomical reason for this apparently impossible event, but it appears that few readers have ever challenged it.)
As the scene plays out, de Gaulle’s car approaches at 8:18 p.m. The lookout signals as it speeds by, but he’s almost invisible to the gunmen 100 yards down the avenue. They see de Gaulle just as he races past and they rush a few shots at the retreating Citroën, blowing out its tires, shattering its windows, and missing the presidential nose by inches but failing to disable the car or even wing the General. The second mobile team of killers then engages de Gaulle’s security forces in a high-speed gun battle, but they also fail. The motorcade reaches the airport safely and de Gaulle sneers, “They can’t shoot straight.”
The mission has failed, and now the assassins are on the run and French security is forewarned and doubly cautious. That’s a setback that sets up the entire novel that follows.
Frederick Forsyth didn’t develop his scene they way we’ve sketched it out, because he based it on an actual assassination attempt. But if he hadn’t had a historical event to work from, he still could’ve developed it from a lame scene like the one we began with — simply by asking the right questions.

Fixing Reactive Scenes

  A reactive scene contains a reaction, a dilemma, and a decision. Ask the following diagnostic questions to help you nurse reactive scenes to health:

  ✓ Does the scene begin with a reaction appropriate to the setback from a previous scene? Is it emotive and visceral? Is the reaction reasonable, given the POV character’s emotional state and personality type? Does it run too long or too short?

  ✓ Do you segue from the reaction to a dilemma that gives the POV character no good options? Is the dilemma appropriately difficult for the scene you’re writing — neither too easy nor too hard? Is there some obvious solution kicking around that your character is too dense to see? Have you boxed in your character well enough? Does the character spend the appropriate amount of time trying to solve the problem?

  ✓ Does your character come to a decision at the end? Is the decision simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult? Will your reader respect your character’s decision? Will your reader feel compelled to turn the page to see whether the character can execute that decision?In this section, we imagine a hypothetical reactive scene that doesn’t work and change it by stages to make it work.

Imagining a reactive scene: Outlander

We take inspiration for our example reactive scene from the time-travel romance novel Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon. The scene is set roughly a quarter of the way into the book, and it forms the end of Act 1 in the novel’s three-act structure, so we first need to talk about the story setup.
It’s late 1945. World War II is over, and the heroine, Claire Randall, is an English nurse getting reacquainted with her husband Frank after several years of wartime separation. While visiting Scotland with Frank, Claire accidentally passes through a time portal and finds herself in 1743 Scotland with no way to get back. The clan MacKenzie takes her in, but they suspect her of being an English spy. When Claire’s been there about a month, the local English captain “Black Jack” Randall (an ancestor of Claire’s husband Frank) interrogates her and disbelieves the lies she tells him about where she came from. Captain Randall ends the interview by slugging Claire in the belly and ordering her Scottish friends to deliver her into his custody on the following Monday for further questioning. This is the setback that Claire must now recover from. It’s a major setback — it’s the first disaster in the book’s three-disaster structure.

How should we follow this disaster? Before we tell you how Diana Gabaldon did it, we imagine a poorly structured reactive scene that runs as follows: Claire has a chat with Dougal MacKenzie, one of the clan chieftains, and his nephew Jamie Fraser, a swashbuckling young giant whom Claire has a crush on. They agree that it’s rotten luck that she’ll have to turn herself in on Monday, but because they can’t do anything about it, Claire and Jamie might as well get drunk and then retire to a private place for the smooching scene that every romance novel needs.

Checking for change (again)

What’s wrong with the reactive scene in the preceding section? It’s horrible. Nothing has changed by the end of the scene. Claire is in mortal danger at the beginning, and she’s still in mortal danger at the end.The reason nothing changes is that Claire doesn’t seem to care. She doesn’t react at all after being slugged, and she doesn’t worry about her future. Because Claire doesn’t seem to want change, she doesn’t pursue it, and therefore nothing happens. You may know some people who’d give up in that kind of situation and go get drunk with their friends, but our fictional characters need to be tougher than that. In fiction, characters need to fight back. The scene as we’ve described it doesn’t work.
You may argue that nobody would ever write such a weak scene. Yes, they would. Writers write weak scenes all the time — but remember that writing a weak scene is often just a stepping stone to writing a strong one. The solution is to ask the right questions and then use the answers to strengthen the scene. We show you how in the following sections.

Fitting the reaction to the setback

Start with the diagnostic questions about the reaction part of the reactive scene: Does the scene begin with a reaction appropriate to the setback from a previous scene? Is it emotive and visceral? Is the reaction reasonable, given the POV character’s emotional state and personality type? Does it run too long or too short?
In our hypothetical scene, Claire doesn’t seem to feel any pain or any emotion after being slugged in the stomach. That’s not appropriate. We’re going to give her time to feel the pain; give her time to let the shock run through her and then out of her; give her time to burn with rage at her attacker, chew herself out for her helplessness. She’ll take time to feel.

Claire would seem like a weakling if we drag this out too long, but she’d seem inhuman if we cut this reaction short. We’ll set the length of the reaction to fit its importance. We’ll let her work through the pain, and then she’ll be ready for the next phase of the scene.

Working through the dilemma

Say we’ve added an appropriate reaction to our hypothetical scene, which now runs like this: For a few minutes, Claire can hardly breathe because of the pain in her belly. She thinks she may throw up, and her mind feels numb at the thought that a man who looks like her husband could be so evil. Then she has a chat with Dougal MacKenzie and his nephew Jamie Fraser. They agree that it’s rotten luck that she’ll have to turn herself in on Monday, but because they can’t do anything about it, Claire and Jamie might as well get drunk and then retire to a private place for the smooching scene that every romance novel needs.
This is slightly better than our first cut at the scene, but it’s still wretchedly unrealistic. The structure is still weak. Claire has now worked through the pain from the past scene, but she doesn’t seem to worry about her future.
Look at our next set of diagnostic questions: Do you segue from the reaction to a dilemma that gives the POV character no good options? Is the dilemma appropriately difficult? Is there some obvious solution kicking around that your character is too dense to see? Have you boxed in your character well enough? Does the character spend the appropriate amount of time trying to solve the problem?
We need Claire to face up to her problems by working through her options in detail. They’re bad options, all of them, but Claire must spend some time talking or thinking about them to convince the reader that she’s truly boxed in.
For starters, Jack Randall doesn’t trust her, and if she turns herself in to him next Monday, then he could do anything — flog her, rape her, hang her. Given Randall’s horrible reputation, these are not only possible; they’re likely. Turning herself in is a terrible idea.
What else can Claire try? Can she run? Not a chance. The English soldiers control the roads. Furthermore, she’s not free to leave the Scottish men she’s traveling with, because they still suspect her of being an English spy. Everybody suspects Claire, and the only person who really likes her is Jamie.
Jamie’s uncle Dougal finally hits on a terrific idea that will solve all their problems. If Claire marries Jamie, then she’ll no longer be subject to English law. Instead, she’ll be a Scot and therefore under the control of the local laird.

The marriage will also make it impossible for Jamie ever to usurp his uncle’s place as laird, because the MacKenzie clan would never accept a leader with an English-born wife. This plan solves everybody’s problems, but for Claire, it’s a terrible idea. She likes Jamie, to be sure. She’s even attracted to him. But she’s married, and she’s the kind of person who takes her marriage vows seriously. Her husband is still in 1945, and she hopes to get back to him through the time portal as soon as possible. Claire can’t possibly marry Jamie.

Coming to a decision

Given the revisions in the preceding sections, our scene is coming along reasonably well, with a strong reaction and a sharp dilemma that we can summarize this way: For a few minutes, Claire can hardly breathe because of the pain in her belly. She thinks she may throw up, and her mind feels numb at the thought that a man who looks like her husband could be so evil. Now she needs to figure out what to do next Monday. She can’t turn herself in to Captain Randall — he might kill her. She can’t escape — the English control the roads. She can’t take Dougal’s advice and marry Jamie — she’s already married to a man she loves. Unable to decide, she spends the weekend in a drunken stupor, smooching with Jamie.
What’s wrong with this? The structural problem is the fact that Claire can’t stop dithering, so this dilemma is never going to end.
Look at our diagnostic questions: Does your character come to a decision at the end? Is the decision simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult? Will your reader respect your character’s decision? Will your reader feel compelled to turn the page to see whether the character can execute that decision?
Claire needs to decide, which means taking her least-bad option. That turns out to be marrying Jamie. This decision fits all our criteria. Getting married is both simple and objective. Is it worthwhile? Yes, Jamie’s one hot guy, and Claire already has a crush on him. Is it achievable? Yes, because Jamie’s  willing and a parson is available. Is it difficult? Yes, because Claire is married already — to a man who isn’t born yet — but she’s still committed to him.

Coming to the final result

Here’s how the reactive scene actually works in Outlander: After Captain Randall slugs Claire in the stomach, she spends several paragraphs feeling her pain and recovering from the shock to her system. Jamie’s uncle Dougal confronts Captain Randall in his office and vents his outrage, but Claire can’t hear the details.

When Dougal finishes ranting at Randall, he escorts Claire out of the fort and takes her to a sulfurous spring known as the liar’s spring because a local legend says that anyone who drinks from it and then tells a lie will have her gizzard burned out. After Claire drinks, Dougal questions her and confirms in his own mind that she’s no English spy. He still has no idea who she is or where she came from, but he’s convinced that he can let her into the clan by marrying Jamie.
Dougal then tells Claire in excruciating detail the story of how Captain Randall flogged Jamie a few years ago — twice in one week — nearly killing him. Dougal lays it on thick, making it clear that Randall is far worse than Claire had imagined and that Jamie has incredible courage.
Why has Dougal told her all this? He wants to impress on Claire just how evil Captain Randall is and also what an excellent man Jamie is. Then Dougal tells her that he’s decided she must marry Jamie. She protests, of course, and puts up quite a lot of opposition, but turning herself in to Randall would be too horrible to imagine. Jamie is a strong, courageous, and kind man who’ll protect Claire with his life.
The reader, by this point, is desperately hoping she’ll agree. Claire continues to protest, looking for any way out. She runs through every argument she can, first with Dougal, then with herself. Finally, she demands to talk to Jamie, who has no qualms at all about marrying her. Slowly, her resistance wears down and she finally realizes she has no choice. She’s going to marry Jamie. This is the decision that commits Claire to the rest of the story.

Killing an Incurable Scene

A weak scene can become a strong scene if you just ask the right questions and then use the answers to find ways to improve it, as we show you in the preceding sections. Some scenes, however, just don’t pull through, despite your best efforts.
  Every scene needs to pull its own weight by advancing your story. Every scene is a mini-story that must give your reader a powerful emotional experience. Every scene. No exceptions.
If you have a scene that simply can’t be helped, then you already know you should kill it — you probably just don’t want to. You feel that this scene is your baby. You labored over those words. You sweated blood to create that scene. Now you should kill it just because it isn’t doing its job?

If you’re struggling with this idea, you’re being shackled by the wrong  metaphor. Scenes are not your babies; scenes aren’t people at all. Scenes are records of conflict in your story. That’s it — just records. They’re black ink on white paper. Bits on a hard drive. Inert matter.
We don’t recommend that you delete any scene, of course. It’ll be there on your computer for all eternity, sitting in your previous draft, should you ever need to go look it up. When you kill a scene, all you’re doing is refusing to pull it forward into your next draft. That scene is deadwood, a failed idea that’s now sucking the life out of your story. Leave it behind.
  If losing a scene leaves a small gap in your story, then make a note for yourself to salvage whatever bits of it you need. If you were using the scene to give the reader some necessary information, then find some other scene that works and wedge in the information there. 
Don’t waste your emotional energy grieving for scenes that can’t be fixed. You need that energy for injecting new emotive life into the scenes that can.


}
{

Chapter 15

Editing Your Scenes for Content

In This Chapter

Deciding whether to show or tell

Editing clips

