Make your character “roughly typical” in most ways. Make him “unusual for his group” in a few ways. The more unusual he is, the more awareness he needs to show that he is, in fact, a bit abnormal. A character’s feelings about his differences may well play a key role in your novel.Suppose you’re a woman writing a male character. Create him so that he follows the norms, mostly, but perhaps make him a bit more artistic than most guys. Maybe make him a lot more emotionally sensitive than the average Joe. And maybe make him really tall, maybe 6'4". Finally, make sure that he’s aware of how he’s different, so the reader knows you know. Your guy may be a little embarrassed to be artsy, a lot embarrassed to be so emotive, and reasonably proud of his height. Even if he’s not embarrassed, the important thing is that he knows he’s different, so your reader isn’t misled into thinking you don’t know what the norms are.

Motivation: Looking to Your  Character’s Future

Your character has a past, but more importantly, she has a future. Your character is going somewhere or hopes to go somewhere. But the future is uncertain. Nobody knows what your character will do tomorrow. All you can know is what your character intends to do tomorrow. That’s roughly what people mean when they talk about your character’s motivation.
The term motivation crops up a lot in books on how to write fiction. It’s an ambiguous term, meaning different things to different writers. We think it’s a fine word, but we won’t be bound by what other people mean by this term. We define it to encompass most of the common meanings. A character’s motivation is made up of three essential parts:

  ✓ Values: Those things a character holds most strongly to be true.

  ✓ Ambition: The one abstract thing a character wants in life.

  ✓ Story goal: The one concrete thing a character thinks will enable her to achieve her ambition.

When you know your character’s values, ambition, and story goal, you can always give her credible reasons to act, because you always know her motivation. That’s all you need in order to write a powerful, compelling character.

Values: Core truths for your character

Everybody holds certain truths to be self-evident. The great Greek mathematician Euclid derived all of geometry from a very few postulates, which he believed to be so obvious that he didn’t need to prove them (though one of his postulates was wrong). Thomas Jefferson, when he penned the Declaration of Independence, thought it self-evident that “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” were the common right of all men (even though Jefferson himself owned slaves). If you want to drive your best friend nuts, ask her what makes life worth living. No matter what she answers, keep asking, over and over, “Why does that make life worth living? How do you know?” Eventually, you’ll back her into a corner and she’ll huff at you, “It just is. It’s obvious, and I don’t have to explain it.” All of these are examples of 
what we mean by the word value.
A value is a core truth, something that’s “obviously true” to your character. A value needs no explanation, no proof, no reason. A value is true because it’s true because it’s true.
  A value isn’t necessarily obvious or true to anyone else. A character may be inconsistent in applying her values, and a value may actually be incorrect.Making your character’s values believable
A special kind of core truth is the answer to the question, “What’s the most important thing in the world to you?” Ask a hundred people this question, and you’ll probably get at least 20 different answers. Money. Freedom. Security. Friendship. Family. God. Health. Self-esteem. Integrity. Honor. Intellectual honesty. Faith. Fun. Truth. Beauty. The list goes on and on.
It’s common to say that people value these things. Please note that our definition of value goes beyond what people consider merely important: We define value to be what people believe to be true. So if somebody values money, then her core truth value is the statement, “Money is a very important thing in my life.”
You can choose any values you want for your character. It’s okay if your character can’t give a reason for her values. In fact, if she can, then you haven’t uncovered her real values yet, and you need to take her deeper.
  Make sure you can explain your character’s reasons, even if she can’t. In your character’s universe, you are god, and you get to know what she doesn’t and can’t know. What genetic trait or early experience or cultural influences led her to her values? As soon as you know this, you know all that you need to make those values believable.
  You don’t have to convince your reader that a character’s values are obvious or true or consistent; you only have to convince the reader that the character believes her values are obvious and true and consistent. If the character is blinded by cultural drivers or self-interest or genetic predisposition, your reader will understand that (see Chapter 6 for a discussion  of cultural drivers).

Aiming for inconsistency: Why values should conflict

  Your character should have more than one value. Ideally, each character should have two or three, and they should be contradictory. Why? Because that means that at the core of your character is an internal conflict that she can never resolve. Conflict is good in fiction, and internal conflict makes for great fiction. That internal conflict always springs from values that contradict each other.

Suppose, for example, that Darth Vader has a value that says, “Nothing is more important than power.” If that’s his only value, then Vader is a one-dimensional villain, not particularly deep or interesting. Now suppose Vader adopts a second value that says, “Nothing is more important than my son.” Now he has a contradiction. It can’t be true that both power and his son are the most important thing in his life. At some point, Vader will have to choose between these values. When that happens, he becomes a far more interesting character, and his story deepens, because he’s no longer predictable. When push comes to shove, he might go either way.
  Your character is most interesting when his values are most contradictory. When your character is perfectly consistent, he’s perfectly predictable. But tie a knot in his soul, and watch him struggle.

Ambitions: Getting abstract, or why  Miss America wants “world peace”

Values are good, but they’re not enough. Out of a character’s values spring a desire for a different story world. Your character wants change, and if you ask her what she wants, she’s likely to give you an abstract answer that goes to her deepest yearnings. 
Ask a contestant for Miss America what she wants most, and she invariably answers, “World peace.” That’s a wonderful goal, but it’s vague. What does world peace look like, exactly? That’s the problem, isn’t it? Trying to define world peace is pretty darn hard. It takes precision of thought. It takes a seri-ous grasp of the situation. It takes a lot of words. If you try to get specific about world peace, you go way outside the bounds of a sound bite. And that’s why Miss America is vague when you ask her this question. She has to speak abstractly in order to speak succinctly. Don’t mock her. You’d do no better in her situation.
World peace is abstract — you can neither see nor hear nor feel it. It’s an idea. It’s vague and squishy. It’s an example of what we call an ambition. Your character needs an ambition in life. An ambition is the one abstract thing that your character wants more than any other.
  An ambition must spring from a character’s values. The values define the reason for the ambition. If your main character has a value that says, “Money is the most important thing in my life,” for example, then her ambition may very reasonably be, “I want to get very rich.” That ambition makes perfect sense for that value. 
  A character can have multiple contradictory values, but she should have only one ambition. Your story needs to be focused, and you achieve that focus by limiting your character to a single ambition.Note that two characters may have the same ambition but have very different underlying values. For example, you may have a second character who also has the ambition “I want to get very rich,” which springs from a value of “Helping the poor is the most important thing in the world.” This character wants to get rich and give it all away to the starving millions.

Story goals: Your story’s ultimate driver

Knowing your character’s ambition is great, but it’s not enough to make a story. What does Miss America mean by world peace? What does that look like? What would it take to achieve it? Until you have a simple, clear, concrete answer to these questions, all you have is a vague yearning. We call the concrete answer a story goal, which is a term we made up because there just isn’t a suitable word handy.
A story goal is the answer to the question “How exactly do you want to achieve your ambition?” The story goal of your lead character drives your story. As soon as your lead character has a story goal, you have a story. If your lead character has no story goal, then you simply don’t have a story.Consider Frodo Baggins, the lead character in J. R. R. Tolkein’s The Lord of the Rings. Frodo is a hobbit, living in the Shire, who owns a magic ring. Early in the story, he learns from the wizard Gandalf that this Ring of Power was created by the Dark Lord Sauron in deep antiquity. The Ring contains much of Sauron’s evil power, and so it corrupts all who own it. If Sauron regains the Ring, he’ll be powerful enough to rule Middle Earth forever. Frodo (like Miss America) wants world peace. That’s his ambition. For him, world peace can only come if he throws the Ring into the Cracks of Doom in the land of Mordor. This is the story goal for The Lord of the Rings, and it drives the story for many hundreds of pages.

What makes a great story goal

  A story goal should have these properties:

  ✓ Objective: The reader should know how to tell whether the character achieves the story goal.

  ✓ Simple: The reader should be able to picture what success looks like.

  ✓ Important: The reader must believe the story goal matters.

  ✓ Achievable: The reader should believe that the character has a chance to reach her story goal.

  ✓ Difficult: The reader should believe that the character may fail.

In Chapter 6, we talk about the importance of a story question, which has the same properties we list here. That’s because the story question amounts to asking, “Will the central character achieve her story goal?”

Why each character needs a story goal

  Please note that a story has only one story question, whereas every important character in your story should have a story goal. The story question asks whether your lead character will achieve his story goal. But what about those other characters? Aren’t their story goals important? Yes, for two reasons:

  ✓ Those other story goals often oppose the story goal of your lead character. That’s good — it’s why your story has conflict.

✓ Each of those story goals defines a separate thread of your story. When you have several major characters, each with his or her own story goal, then you have a rich tapestry of a story.

  Each of your characters believes that he or she is the lead character in the story. You may label one the hero, another the villain, another the sidekick, another the mentor, another the fool. But all five think they’re the hero. All five have a story goal. All five find the others either helpful or harmful. This is the secret to writing deep characters: No character ever believes he’s an extra.
If you’d like to go into more depth in understanding the values, ambitions, and story goals of your characters, we recommend the book Getting Into Character, by Brandilyn Collins (Wiley), which asks and answers the question, “What can a fiction writer learn from a method actor?” Collins is a best-selling suspense novelist with a background in drama.

Establishing your character’s motivation

Developing your character’s motivation is hard, dirty, messy, creative work. You can do it in any order you like. You don’t have to define the character’s values first, then ambition, and then story goals. You can work out each character’s motivation before you write your first draft or afterward or while you’re writing. But you must do this work eventually, or your readers will complain that your characters are flat and boring. (A flat character is one who lacks depth and is therefore predictable.)

A writing exercise: Motivating Marcus

  Say that you’ve already worked out the backstory for your character Marcus (see the earlier section “Creating your character’s backstory”) and now you’re ready to nail down his motivation. Take a clean sheet of paper or open a new document and title it “Motivation for Marcus.” Divide the page into thirds horizontally and add subheads for values, ambition, and story goal. Work through these steps:

  1.  Ask yourself what you already know about the character.

    Do you know any of Marcus’s values — his core truths? Write them down. You don’t have to know them all just yet, so write what you know so far. What about his ambition? If you know his abstract goal in life, write it down. Or maybe you know his story goal — the one concrete thing he aims to achieve in this story. Write it down.

  2.  Fill in what’s missing, starting from where you are and working in both directions.

•If you know one of Marcus’s values: Ask what abstract ambition may spring from that value. Then ask what concrete story goal would best fulfill that ambition.

•If you know his ambition: Ask what value it comes from. Then ask what story goal will make his ambition come true.

•If you know his story goal: Ask what abstract ambition motivates it. Then ask what value led to that ambition.

  3.  Ask yourself what other values your character has.

    Look for values that conflict with the ones he has already. Try for at least two, maybe three main values in Marcus’s life.

  4.  Go over your list in both directions, taking care that it all makes sense and that you can explain it to your reader.

    Does the ambition spring directly from at least one value? Is the story goal the best way for Marcus to achieve his ambition? Does he have conflicting values that will add spice to his story?

Example: Interviewing Frodo Baggins

  Nailing down a character’s values is often hard. If you have problems, try interviewing your character. Keep asking why until he throws up his hands and shouts, “Just because!” When he can’t give a rational answer, that’s when you’ve hit a value.
For example, imagine you’re J. R. R. Tolkien and you’re developing the motivation for Frodo Baggins. You’ve given Frodo the story goal of throwing the Ring into the Cracks of Doom, but you’re a little fuzzy on why Frodo would be willing to take on such a dangerous quest. Here’s an imaginary interview that illustrates how you may push Frodo up against the wall and nail down his motivation:

JRRT: Frodo, I understand you plan to leave the Shire and go to Rivendell with the Ring. Ultimately, you’re looking for some way or somebody to take the Ring to Mordor and throw it into the Cracks of Doom. You can’t be serious. Why would you take on such a ridiculous quest?

FB: Well, Gandalf told me to.

JRRT: Don’t be absurd. You’re leaving home because Gandalf told you to? Why does he think you should go?

FB: We have to defeat the Dark Lord Sauron.

JRRT: That’s quite a leap, isn’t it? Aren’t there other ways to defeat Sauron? Why not smash the Ring right here? Grab a hammer and give it a whack?

FB: No can do. Gandalf said that the Ring contains Sauron’s power. No hobbit could destroy it. No fire in Middle Earth is hot enough, other than the Cracks of Doom, where it was forged in the depths of time.

JRRT (grinning): Nice one, there — the “depths of time.” I’ll have to remember that. But why you? No offense, Frodo, but you’re not a very impressive guy. If this is so important to Gandalf, why doesn’t he do it?

FB: The Ring corrupts anyone who has it. Gandalf is a great wizard, and the Ring would pull him into evil through his desire to do good.

JRRT: And why won’t the Ring corrupt you then?

FB (stammering): Gandalf . . . didn’t really explain that. I guess I’m not important enough to corrupt. I just don’t want Sauron to take over the Shire.

JRRT (leaning forward): Oh? Why?

FB: Because he’ll destroy it. If Sauron gets the Ring, he’ll crush it under his boot. I’m scared to death of him, but . . . I have to help defeat him somehow.

JRRT: Aha! That’s your ambition, isn’t it? You want to defeat Sauron?

FB: I suppose so. It’s not enough to push him back or contain him. He has to be beaten, now and forever.

JRRT (writing): Frodo’s ambition is to defeat the Dark Lord Sauron. That’s great. A very fine ambition. But now let me ask again. Why?

FB: I told you. Sauron will destroy the Shire.

JRRT: So? Why is that so bad?

FB: It’s my home.

JRRT: Why not go elsewhere?

FB: I don’t want to go elsewhere. The Shire is my home, and I want to live here.

JRRT: Why here?

FB (getting angry): I already told you. I want to live in the Shire. It’s my home, and I love it.

JRRT: Why do you love it?

FB: Just because I love it. That’s all the reason I need.

JRRT (rubbing hands together): Frodo, I think we’ve found your value. You love the Shire more than anything else, don’t you?

FB (scratching his chin): Yes, I suppose that’s true. Yes, absolutely. I never thought of that before. I guess I thought it was obvious.

JRRT: That’s fine. I love England, so I can empathize. But there’s something I don’t understand. You love the Shire. You’d do anything to save the Shire. So now you’re going to leave the Shire? Why would you do that if you love it so much? Are you sure you really love it?

FB (thinking for a long time): I don’t think you understand. I love the Shire, and I don’t want to leave. But I have to, for a while, because part of what I love is the other hobbits. The Shire isn’t just the land — it’s the hobbits who live there.

JRRT: Hobbits are foolish, stupid, bumbling, irritating, and idiotic. Why would you care about them? Aren’t elves much more entertaining?

FB: Hobbits are all that. I’m all that, too. Whether I like it or not, those hobbits are my people, and I care about them, no matter how stupid and bumbling they are.

JRRT: Why?

FB: I can’t explain it. I just do.

JRRT (scribbling feverishly): Excellent! We’ve got your second value. You love your fellow hobbits more than anything. You love the Shire more than anything. But you can’t save your fellow hobbits unless you leave the Shire — possibly forever.

FB (shaking): Stop it! When you say it like that, I don’t want to go. And yet, I have to go. I hate this. I wish somebody else had this cursed Ring.

JRRT: Thanks for your time, Frodo. I think I understand you better now.

Point of View (POV): Getting Some Perspective on Character

Most of your story isn’t about your character’s past or future; fiction is about what’s happening right now. To show a character acting right now, you use a point of view, or POV — a lens through which you show your character’s world (and the story) to the reader.
Your choice of POV is closely related to your choice of narrator — the person who’s telling the story. For most POVs, the narrator is essentially the unnamed author, but it can be a character in the story (if you’re writing in first person).
Most POVs require you to choose a focal character for each scene — one character that you want your reader to identify with during that scene. This focal character is sometimes called the viewpoint character, sometimes the point-of-view character, but most often the POV character.
Over the years, fiction writers have chosen a number of strategies for POV, which we describe in Table 7-1. The two most common strategies, which we list first, have writers choose only one POV character per scene and stick with that character for the entire scene. However, some choices of POV let you have more than one POV character per scene, and one option doesn’t let you have any POV characters at all — you can’t get inside any character’s head.

Table 7-1  Options for Point of View

POV 

First person 

Description 

Write from inside the head of the POV character, using the pronoun I.

POV Characters per Scene

One 

Narrator

A character in the story

POV 

Third person 

Description 

Write from inside the head of the POV character, using the pronoun he or she.

POV Characters per Scene

One 

Narrator

The author

POV 

Third person objective

Description 

Write from outside the head of a focal character, using the pronoun he or she.

POV Characters per Scene

None — you never get inside the head of any character

Narrator

The author

POV 

Head-hopping 

Description 

Write from inside the heads of multiple characters in the same scene, using the pronouns he or she.

POV Characters per Scene

Multiple 

Narrator

The author

POV 

Omniscient 

Description 

Write from inside or outside the heads of multiple characters or from the perspective of a god-like persona who knows things that none of the characters can know.

POV Characters per Scene

Multiple 

Narrator

The author

POV 

Second person 

Description 

Write from inside the head of the POV character, using the pronoun you.

POV Characters per Scene

One 

Narrator

The author

Unless you have a compelling reason to do otherwise, we recommend that you choose only one POV character per scene and stick with that character for the entire scene. Your goal as a fiction writer is to give your reader a powerful emotional experience, and humans find it easiest to identify strongly with only one person at a time. In each scene, you make the reader see what your POV character sees, hear what he hears, smell what he smells, taste what he tastes, do what he does, and feel what he feels.In this section, you look at each of these strategies in turn and see what advantages and disadvantages they give.

First-person POV

When you write a scene in first-person POV, you make the POV character the narrator of the story. This has the advantage of being simple and natural and intimate. Getting deeply inside the character is easy. If the character is having a powerful emotional experience, the reader is also very likely to have one.

Novels written in first-person POV often have only a single POV character for the entire book. That can be a disadvantage if the action is happening on several fronts at once, because one person can be in only one place at a time. A way around the problem of using a limited point of view is to have several POV characters, each narrating their scenes in first person. Switching narra-tors can be a little confusing, however, so if you do this, always make it clear who I is at the very beginning of every scene.
Look at an example taken from a Sherlock Holmes novel, A Study in Scarlet, by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. In the story, Holmes and his friend Dr. Watson have been asked to help two moderately competent Scotland Yard inspectors, Gregson and Lestrade, investigate a murder. Here is a snippet of the scene, written in first person with Watson as the POV character:
Still I had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculties, that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal which was hidden from me.
At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and wrung my companion’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.”
“Except that!” my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd of buffaloes had passed along, there could not be a greater mess. No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you permitted this.”

“I have had so much to do inside the house,” the detective said evasively. 
“My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him to look after this.”
Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. “With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out,” he said.

Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon, is written in first-person POV with a reliable narrator. The Time Traveler’s Wife, by Audrey Niffenegger, uses two first-person narrators, with each scene starting out stating the POV character’s name explicitly. River God, by Wilbur Smith, features a vain and mostly reliable narrator writing in first-person. The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time, by Mark Haddon, uses an autistic boy who is somewhat unreliable as a narrator because of his inability to understand social cues.

Third-person POV

When you write a scene in third-person POV, you refer to the POV character by name and use third-person pronouns such as he or she. This is the most common POV in modern fiction, and it has the advantage of being simple and natural. With a little work, it’s not difficult to get as deeply inside the head of the POV character as you can in first-person POV, because you have access to all the thoughts and feelings of the POV character.
Here we’ve rewritten Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s original scene in third person:
Still Watson had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of Holmes’s perceptive faculties, that he had no doubt that Holmes could see a great deal which was hidden from him.
At the door of the house they were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and wrung Holmes’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.”
“Except that!” Holmes answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd of buffaloes had passed along, there could not be a greater mess. No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you permitted this.”
“I have had so much to do inside the house,” the detective said evasively. 
“My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him to look after this.”
Holmes glanced at Watson and raised his eyebrows sardonically. “With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out,” he said.

Compare the first paragraph of this version to the first paragraph as written in first person in the preceding section. Notice how tricky it is to distinguish between the two men. We were forced to use Holmes twice, rather than using the pronoun he the second time. Otherwise, this example isn’t much different from the first-person POV case.
Third-person POV is very widely used. We particularly like the third-person POV in The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follett; Ender’s Game, by Orson Scott Card; The Little Drummer Girl, by John le Carré; and Dies The Fire, by S. M. Stirling.

Objective third-person POV

When you write a scene in objective third-person POV, you never get inside the character’s head, so you can’t use interior monologue or interior emotion. It’s as if you’re showing the story with a movie camera pointed at the focal character. This has the advantage of making your story intensely visual, but it has the disadvantage that thoughts and emotions simply can’t be easily deduced from body language and facial expressions.
In objective third person, you don’t have a POV character at all (because we define a POV character as a character whose head you can get inside). Instead, you have a focal character on whom you focus your camera. If you want to give your novel a cinematic feel, this is one way to do it, but be warned that it’s hard work and it’s probably not for beginners.
Here is our Sherlock passage rewritten into objective third-person POV:
At the door of the house they were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and wrung Holmes’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.”
“Except that!” Holmes answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd of buffaloes had passed along, there could not be a greater mess. No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you permitted this.”
“I have had so much to do inside the house,” the detective said. “My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him to look after this.”
Holmes glanced at Watson and raised his eyebrows. “With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out,” he said.

We’ve had to strike out the first paragraph of the original. When using this POV, you can’t show the reader the verbatim thoughts or internal feelings of the characters — that’s the definition of this POV. Of course, you can suggest to the reader the thoughts and feelings of the characters while staying outside their heads, using body language, facial expressions, voice tones, and all the other cues that actors use to portray thoughts and feelings on-screen, but it requires quite a bit of skill.
  When working in objective third-person POV, you may be tempted to cheat by having the characters verbalize their thoughts and emotions in ways that sound phony. Don’t cheat. Writing well in this POV takes a sure touch, and if you don’t have that touch, then you’re probably better off using regular third-person.
Dashiell Hammett uses the objective third-person POV effectively in The Maltese Falcon.

Head-hopping POV

Some writers use a form of third-person POV in which they get inside the heads of multiple characters in the same scene. This has the advantage that the reader now knows what everyone is thinking. However, the reader no longer identifies as strongly with any single character, so most fiction teachers discourage writers from using this strategy.
  The easiest way to give the reader a powerful emotional experience is to persuade her that she is one of the characters, and that means choosing just one.
Take a look at the Holmes snippet with some sloppy head-hopping thrown in:
Still Watson had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of Holmes’s perceptive faculties, that he had no doubt that Holmes could see a great deal which was hidden from him.
At the door of the house they were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and wrung Holmes’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.”
“Except that!” Holmes answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd of buffaloes had passed along, there could not be a greater mess. No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you permitted this.”
“I have had so much to do inside the house,” Gregson said, embarrassed at having failed Holmes again. He realized that he could blame Lestrade for the blunder. “My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him to look after this.”

Holmes glanced at Watson and raised his eyebrows sardonically, wondering what sort of idiot Gregson took him for. “With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out,” he said.

We’ve inserted bits of interior monologue in the fourth and fifth paragraphs, allowing the reader to hear the thoughts of Gregson and Holmes. Notice that doing this jerks the reader out of Watson’s head and really adds nothing to the story. If you’re tempted to hop between heads, ask yourself why. Are you really willing to weaken your reader’s powerful emotional experience in order to explain a bit more of what the characters are thinking? 
As we note earlier, many writing teachers strongly discourage the head-hopping POV. However, plenty of best-selling novels hop heads with abandon. Gone With the Wind, by Margaret Mitchell, hasn’t done too badly in the market, despite plenty of head-hopping.

Omniscient POV

The writer who uses omniscient POV knows all and wants to tell all to the reader. The advantage is that the author can ensure that the reader doesn’t miss the point. The disadvantage is that part of the fun of reading fiction is figuring things out. Although a number of 19th-century novelists used omniscient POV extensively, most fiction teachers today consider omniscient POV a felony offense.
The truth is that although doing a good job using omniscient is difficult, it’s possible, and this POV allows you to paint your story on a very broad canvas. If you’re going to use this POV, make sure you know your craft, because it’s much easier to do it poorly than to do it well.
Here is our segment of A Study in Scarlet written with some rather badly done omniscient pieces thrown in:
Still Watson had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of Holmes’s perceptive faculties, that he had no doubt that Holmes could see a great deal which was hidden from him. Had he known how much Holmes had already deduced from the tracks of carriage wheels in the road, he would have been even more amazed.
At the door of the house they were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, one Tobias Gregson, who rushed forward and wrung Holmes’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.” This was not strictly true, but Watson would discover this soon enough.
“Except that!” Holmes answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd of buffaloes had passed along, there could not be a greater mess. No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you permitted this.” Holmes often liked to tweak Gregson, though he considered him the least incompetent of any man in Scotland Yard.
“I have had so much to do inside the house,” Gregson said, exaggerating as he often did. If Gregson had a weakness, it was his ego, which he’d inherited from his grandfather. “My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him to look after this.”
Holmes glanced at Watson and raised his eyebrows sardonically, wondering what sort of idiot Gregson took him for. “With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out,” he said. Holmes thought that this bit of humor would fly above both Gregson and Lestrade’s heads, but he didn’t realize that they actually took his point rather well.

Of course, we were trying to do a bad job, but we didn’t have to try very hard. When you write in omniscient POV, you may find it irresistible to add in extra little bits, as we’ve done in each of the paragraphs here. Look at how we’ve intruded on the story and cut the tension. If you’re tempted to write in omniscient POV, rewrite your passage in normal third person and ask whether it’s better than the original.
Few modern authors write with an omniscient POV, but one book that uses it effectively in many scenes is The Godfather by Mario Puzo.

Second-person POV

Only a rare writer successfully writes a story in second-person POV. When you choose this viewpoint, you’re telling the story using the pronoun you instead of the character’s name. This has the advantage of being intensely personal. A major disadvantage is that the reader may well balk at some actions of the POV character. If the reader ever says, “I wouldn’t do that,” then you’ve lost your reader for that scene.There’s a very rare variation on this that uses the imperative voice. In this voice, you’re telling the reader what to do. An example of this is the short story “How to Become a Writer,” by Lorrie Moore. Here’s the Sherlock scene with you in Watson’s shoes:
Still you had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculties, that you had no doubt that he could see a great deal which was hidden from you.

At the door of the house you and Holmes were met by a tall, white-faced, flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and wrung your companion’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.”
“Except that!” your friend answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd of buffaloes had passed along, there could not be a greater mess. No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you permitted this.”
“I have had so much to do inside the house,” the detective said evasively. “My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him  to look after this.”
Holmes glanced at you and raised his eyebrows sardonically. “With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out,” he said.
  Second-person POV can work, but you’d better be exceptionally good at it. You need to be able to persuade the reader at every point that the POV character’s actions really are exactly what the reader would do. This POV can easily become tiresome and irritating to the reader, and the constant repetition of you can get very old.
Bright Lights, Big City, by Jay McInerney, is one of the very few novels written in the second person.

Choosing between Past and Present Tense

Closely linked to the idea of POV is the tense of a scene. Almost all fiction writers use either past tense or present tense, and they typically talk about their choice of POV and verb tenses in the same breath — “I’m writing in first-person, present,” or “Joe always writes in third-person, past.”
Past tense is far more common than present tense, and it’s a little easier  to write. You may like present tense because you believe it’s different and cool. Writing in present tense certainly gives your fiction a strong sense of immediacy — of happening right now. If you’re using first-person POV, then the narration in present tense implies to the reader that the character is a right-now kind of person. But be aware that many readers feel uncomfortable reading present tense, and although they may agree that it’s different, these readers disagree with you about its being cool.

To write in present tense, change all simple past-tense verbs to simple present-tense verbs. For example, ran becomes runs and punched becomes punches. You may find that certain verbs cause problems when you do this. For example, the sentence “I guessed that he was Little John” can’t just become “I guess that he is Little John” because “I guess” is a colloquialism — a casual, conversational expression — meaning “I suppose.” So you may have to change the verb to get the awkward sentence “I make a guess that he is Little John” or “I’m guessing that he is Little John.” Most verbs don’t cause problems, but be aware that a few do.
Writing in present tense requires only a little more skill than writing in past tense, and we certainly don’t want to discourage you from using it if you think it’s right for your story. Even if you’re a beginning writer, you should be able to write just about as well in present tense as in past tense. Just bear in mind that some readers dislike present tense for no other reason than they dislike it.
The Time Traveler’s Wife, by Audrey Niffenegger, is a terrific example of a present tense novel, as is The Speed of Dark, by Elizabeth Moon.

Revealing Your Characters to the Reader

Creating characters using the methods we’ve outlined so far in this chapter is the easy part. The hard part is revealing your characters to your reader while keeping the story moving. You generally don’t want to stop the story cold while you spend a few pages explaining a character’s motivation or backstory. Yes, you can use narrative summary to explain these, but often you’ll choose to show the reader who your character is instead of telling your reader about your character. 
So how do you show your character to your reader? You have several valuable tools: action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, description, and flashback. We discuss these at length in Chapter 10, but it’s appropriate to mention here some ways in which each of these reveal character. With each method, we include a small example snippet in a scene featuring a used-car salesman greeting a pair of potential buyers.

  ✓ Dialogue: You can find out plenty about a character by what he says. Most people are only too happy to talk about themselves, and your characters are no exception. Of course, a character can lie, but even lies tell you how he wants to be perceived, which tells you something about him. You can also figure out a ton just from the way he speaks — his tone of voice, his speed in speaking, his word choices, his grammatical errors, his use or misuse of logic, his judgments of other characters. All of these give the reader hints about whether they like or dislike the character, trust him or distrust him, respect him, fear him, or scorn him. Look at the following example and see what you can pick up from the dialogue. What do you think of the narrator and his boss after reading this dialogue?
   “Go get ’em.” Shriver pointed at the couple walking through the lot inspecting stickers.
   “I’m on it.” I pounced out of my chair and winked at my boss. “Take no prisoners, eh?”
   Shriver grunted and pointed. “Go, go, go!”
   I looked in the mirror and adjusted my tie. “They’ll think I’m Jesus feeding the multitudes before I’m through.”

  ✓ Action: A character who behaves heroically is different from one who behaves like a coward. Yes, a character can behave deceptively, but even so, his actions and body language hint at whether he’s happy, sad, angry, excited, discouraged, afraid, bored, or amused. They also tell a lot about what he thinks and feels about the other characters.

The old aphorism “actions speak louder than words” is doubly true in revealing character. When a character’s actions say one thing and his words say another, readers always believe the actions.
   Read the next example and see what the actions show you. Do you think the customers are likely to buy anything?
   I stepped outside into the brilliant July sunshine and strode toward the pair, sizing them up. The man was kicking tires on our lossleader model. I kid you not — actually kicking the tires. The woman was holding her purse tight to her side, her fingers clenched around the clasp as she squinted at the sticker. Her mouth was a line so thin, you’d need a razorpoint pen to put her lipstick on.

  ✓ Description: The way a character looks is a window into how he perceives himself. If he’s an elitist, his immaculate style of dress tells you instantly that he’s from the upper crust. If he’s an absent-minded intellectual, you see it by the other-universe look in his eyes, even if his hair isn’t quite the mop of an Einstein. If he’s a geeky loner, you know it, even if he left his pocket protector home. In this example, what do the descriptions of the characters tell you about the family dynamics of this couple?
   “Hey there!” I said, stepping into their personal zone. “Great day, isn’t it? What can I do for you folks today?”
   The man looked at me, and yet he didn’t look at me, his eyes shifting up almost to contact with mine, then flickering away. I couldn’t quite tell if he’d shaved today. His hand was hard and callused and greasy when we shook. His wife slunk back behind him. Her eyes had that hollow, hungry look of a beaten dog, and her lank, shoulder-length hair hung down onto a dress that fit her like a potato sack.

  ✓ Interior monologue: If you know what a character’s thinking, then you have direct access to his inner being. As with dialogue, you find out even more by the way he expresses his thoughts internally — his word choices, grammar, logic, and value judgments on other characters all tell you who he really is, even if he himself isn’t aware of it. Based on the interior monologue, do you think the narrator is as enthusiastic as he sounds?
   “Can we test drive this one?” The man jerked his head at the cadaverous Fiat that Shriver calls the Frantic Italian Attempt at Transportation.
   “Absolutely, sir, I’ll just need your driver’s license and we can take this rocket out on the road.” If I made this sale, the commission would be all of about eighteen bucks. Shriver is going to laugh his socks off at me.

✓ Interior emotion: Different characters have different ranges of emotion. Some people constantly overreact to everything, as if their emotional response circuitry only has one setting — full volume. Other people take everything in stride, barely flinching even when the sky really is falling. The way your characters react emotively can tell your reader volumes. In this example, what new thing do you guess about the narrator from his interior emotion? 
   “Molly, give me my wallet.” The man turned to look at her.
   She fumbled in her purse, first slowly, then frantically. “Frankie, it ain’t—”
   He backhanded her hard across the right cheek. “Stupid little bitch!”
   A burst of molten lead exploded in my gut. All of a sudden, I couldn’t hear anything except the ten thousand hornets buzzing in my brain.

  ✓ Flashback: We recommend that you be wary of overusing flashback; however, it can be a valuable tool in exposing part of a character’s back-story, throwing a floodlight on his real essence.
   Don’t waste a flashback on trivial incidents. If you’re going to use this tool, take your reader to the worst times of your character’s life. Your reader will empathize with your character in a whole new way if you take them both into the character’s private hell.
   In the following example, how do you think our narrator’s flashback is going to play out, given only the first two paragraphs? When the flash-back ends, what new direction do you think this scene will go?
   I’m 8 years old and the old man is hitting Mama again. Another sharp, tight slap rips through the bedroom wall, then her controlled little gasp, then the one word hissed out. “Bitch!” 
   My fists knot up into hammers of rage, such as only a 63-pound superhero can bring to bear on the forces of evil.
We’ve laid things on extra thick in the examples here to get our point across in minimal space. Our examples are designed to highlight our teaching points, not for literary merit. In your novel, you have vastly more space to work, and you can afford to be a lot more subtle.

MARGINALIA:

Going deep: Researching your character’s psychology

Building  great  characters  is  a  bottomless  well — you can always go deeper. Throughout this chapter, we look at things from a pragmatic novelist’s point of view. You may well decide, however, that you want to know more about psychology. If you do, bravo! It’s a task you’ll never finish, but getting started is still  worthwhile.
You have many options in studying psychology, none of which require you to go back to school. Start by looking inside yourself. What makes you tick? Why do you do the things you do? What are your own values, ambitions, and goals in life? What might explain your values? You may even want to explore some of your own personality issues with a counselor, psychologist, or psychiatrist. (If people ask where you got the psychological insight, tell them you merely did your homework.)
If you prefer a less hands-on approach, you can find any number of books on psychology, both academic and popular approaches. Although psychology is a science, plenty of pseudoscience out there is masquerading as psychology. But even the wackiest pseudopsychology theory may still give you some insights into your characters. At the very least, a little book study can help you avoid blunders like calling a character schizophrenic when you actually meant that he has multiple personality disorder.
You may be one of those intuitive types who prefers  to  learn  everything  you  know  about people by watching them. If so, you’re in good company.  That’s  all  the  research  that  many novelists ever do. But if you choose to dive deep into human psychology, you’ll enrich yourself and your story. Just remember to come up for air long enough to actually write some fiction.

A question of trust: Unreliable narrators

A first-person narrator is allowed to be unreliable.  This  can  mean  that  the  narrator  is self-deceived, unintelligent, uninformed, misinformed, irrational, a liar, or even insane. A fine  example  of  a  first-person  novel  with  a somewhat unreliable narrator is Mark Twain’s The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, in which young Huck accurately tells his story but often misinterprets what happened or is blinded by the racist culture he’s immersed in. Huck Finn clearly has different values than Twain.
Using an unreliable narrator can add depth to the character telling the story, but it does take some finesse. If you use an unreliable narrator, include some hints early in the story so the reader knows to treat the character’s version of events with some skepticism or at least senses that something is off. And throughout the book, add some clues in dialogue and action that help confirm or deny what the narrator says. That way, you give the reader some sense of what really happened and ensure that inconsistencies in the story look like character traits rather than mistakes.

Tense matters: Delivering backstory when you’re using past or present

If  you’re  writing  your  main  story  in  present tense,  then  to  tell  a  sliver  of  backstory,  you switch your verbs temporarily to past tense. Here’s  an  example,  in  which  the  backstory starts in the second sentence:
    As  I  leaf  through  my  diary  from  seventh grade, I spot an entry about Mr. McDaniel, my  science  teacher.  Mr.  McDaniel  was the only good thing that happened to me in all three years of junior high. He wore a beard, and in 1970, that was a novelty on a teacher. And he saw some sort of promise in me that nobody else saw.
Using the right verb tense for backstory is a little more complicated if you’re writing your main story in past tense. Many writers want to switch to past-perfect tense for the entire back-story, constantly using the word had. But that quickly ties you in knots. The solution is to use had once, the first time you use a verb in the backstory. After that, switch back to ordinary past tense. Your reader will follow this nicely. Here’s the example in past tense:
    As  Rupert  leafed  through  his  diary  from seventh grade, he spotted an entry about Mr.  McDaniel,  his  science  teacher.  Mr. McDaniel  was  the  only  good  thing  that had happened to Rupert in all three years of junior high. Mr. M. wore a beard, and in 1970, that was a novelty on a teacher. And he saw some sort of promise in Rupert that nobody else saw.


}
{


Chapter 8

Storyline and Three-Act Structure: The Top Layers of Your Plot

In This Chapter

Writing a storyline to describe the essence of your story

Filling in the beginning, middle, and end with a three-act structure

Presenting your three-act structure

Story structure — a succinct sketch of your story that captures its essence — is the key to selling your story to a publisher, and it’s critical to your success as a writer. The reason it’s such a great selling tool is that when you can explain your story in just a few words, people instantly know whether this story is for them or not. It’s important to you because it helps you keep focused as you write and edit your novel.
The modern novel is an extremely complex art form. The plot of a novel has six layers of complexity. In this chapter, we discuss the two highest-level layers: the storyline and the three-act structure. We cover the other layers (synopsis, scene list, scene, and clips) in Chapters 9 and 10.

Giving the Big Picture of Story Structure: Your Storyline

If you want to write a commercially successful novel, then you need to sell your book seven times. We call this sequence the selling chain. Here’s what the selling chain looks like:

  1.  You or preferably your agent sells the concept to an acquisitions editor, who decides to take it to her publishing committee for review.

  2.  The editor sells the idea to the publishing committee, which is responsible for making the decision to publish the book. The publisher then offers you a contract that specifies your royalties and advance payments.

3.  When the book goes into production, the editor sells the concept to the sales team, which has to get orders from the bookstores and chains.

  4.  The sales team sells the book to professional buyers, who place orders for bookstores and chains of bookstores.

  5.  The catalog copy and back-cover copy sell the idea to the sales staff in bookstores, who interact with readers every day.

  6.  The back-cover copy or the bookstore’s sales staff sells the book to readers, who come into bookstores looking for something to read.

  7.  The first wave of readers sells the idea to their friends because they enjoyed the book so much they can’t stop talking about it.

The selling chain is essential. If you break any link in the chain, your book will almost certainly fail to do well.
Please note one important fact: The people in the selling chain don’t know your story as well as you do, but each of them needs to find some way to communicate his or her excitement about your novel to the next link in the chain. If you want them to do their job, then giving them the tool they need is your responsibility. That tool is a short, one-sentence summary of your novel. We call this sentence the storyline. The storyline of your novel captures the essence of the story.
You need to put on your minimalist hat when thinking about your storyline. The question is not how much you can add to the story; it’s how much you can take away. In this section, we show you how to write one.

Understanding the value of a storyline

You won’t die if you don’t write a storyline, and you’ll still be able to write a novel. So why spend the time writing one? Consider a scenario where a story-line comes in useful:
You’re at a writing conference in a large hotel, waiting for the elevator. When it arrives, you walk in and a high-powered agent steps in beside you. You give her a friendly smile. She squints at your name tag and says, “Hi, what sort of fiction are you writing?”
The door chings shut and you feel your heart thudding just beneath your vocal cords. “I . . . well, see, there’s this guy,” you say, “and he’s working in the bus factory. No wait, I changed that. He’s driving a bus for the city. And there’s this girl, too. Not really his girlfriend, see, but he’d like that, only she doesn’t know he exists. I mean she kind of knows who he is, but not really. And he keeps having dreams about —”The door opens at the next floor and the agent steps out. “Wow, sounds great. Got to run.”

You stand there rubbing your sweaty palms on your shirt, kicking yourself, because you hardly got started. Matter of fact, you never even got to the cool part of your story, which is that the guy who drives the bus is having dreams of an impending terrorist attack on Disneyland, just like the dreams he was having in early September 2001. No matter. That agent is gone, and you’ve blown whatever chance you had.
Rewind that movie halfway and play the last bit of it again:
The door chings shut and you feel your heart thudding just beneath your vocal cords. “I’m writing a paranormal suspense novel about a bus driver who has dreams about a terrorist attack on Disneyland, just like the dreams he was having in September 2001.”
The door opens at the next floor and the agent steps out. She turns around and studies your name tag again and she’s got a funny look on her face. “Listen, I’m on my way to an appointment, but that’s exactly the kind of book I love to read. Can we talk? Here’s my card with my cellphone. Call me in an hour.”
See the difference? In both cases, you have the same great story. In the first case, you don’t know how to present it in one sentence. In the second case, you do.  If you don’t write a great storyline, then everyone in your selling chain will make up a storyline of his or her own. None of these people know your story as well as you do, nor do they love it as much as you do. They’ll do their best, but the storylines they come up with may fail to capture the heart of your story. If your agent or editor knows your storyline right from the start, she’ll make sure that everybody else in the selling chain knows it, too. The simpler your storyline is, the easier it’ll be to pass it down the chain.
  The storyline isn’t merely a selling tool; it can serve to focus your own creative efforts during the arduous months when you’re planning and writing your novel. Knowing what your story is “really about” can keep you on track when the inevitable rabbit trails pop up. Even if you don’t figure out your storyline until after you write your first draft, it can be a powerful tool in helping you cut out the nonessentials when you get into revisions. Although the storyline isn’t essential, it can be as valuable to you, the writer, as it is to all those links in the selling chain.

Writing a great storyline

The purpose of the storyline is to get one of two possible reactions from the hearer:

  ✓ Wow! I like that. Tell me more.

  ✓ Sorry, I’m really not interested.

Your storyline needs to tell people immediately whether they belong to your target audience (see Chapter 3 for a detailed explanation of how you decide on your ideal reader). Remember that you’ll never write a book that appeals to everyone. If someone doesn’t fit in your target audience, that’s okay. You fail quickly, which allows you to move on to the next person. But if someone does belong to your target audience, then you succeed quickly.
Here are the essential features of a good storyline:

  ✓ It’s short. You want it to be short so you can memorize it easily and say it quickly — and so can everyone else in your selling chain.

  ✓ It’s emotive. Fiction is about creating a powerful emotional experience, so your storyline needs to tell what emotive experience your story will deliver.

  ✓ It arouses curiosity. Your storyline shouldn’t give away the story. It should raise a story question that demands an answer.

  If you want to know how to write a good storyline, look at the bestseller lists. They often provide a one-sentence summary of each book. Study how those sentences arouse curiosity and punch emotive buttons in just a few words.
  Here are some common features of successful storylines. They aren’t essential, but they’re good guidelines:

  ✓ Shoot for 25 words or less. If you can do it in less than 15 words, you get extra credit.

  ✓ Limit your storyline to just a few characters. One or two is ideal. Three is the maximum.

  ✓ Tell only one thread of the story, either the most essential one or the most interesting one.

  ✓ Most of the time, don’t name the characters. Instead, describe each, aiming for internal inconsistency that promises conflict. A “one-armed trapeze artist” is infinitely more interesting than “Joe.” (However, whenever a famous character — such as Houdini or physics pioneer Marie Curie — plays a role in your novel, consider bending this rule and naming him or her in your storyline.)

  ✓ When writing the storyline for a historical novel, tell the time period and geographical setting if they add potency to the brew.

  ✓ Use adjectives that evoke empathy or cast a character as an outsider. The word young frequently shows up in storylines because it implies vulnerability and appeals to modern youth-oriented culture. References to gender may set up romantic tension or show characters who cross stereotypes. You can tolerate some redundancy if it heightens the wallop.

✓ Don’t be afraid to use a small amount of hype with a verb such as battles or struggles.

  ✓ Backload the storyline by putting a surprise or some emotively punchy words at the end of the sentence.

You can write your storyline at any time. A lot depends on which creative paradigm you follow (see Chapter 4 for a discussion of creative paradigms). If you’re a seat-of-the-pants writer or an edit-as-you-go writer, you’ll probably do best to write your storyline after your first draft, when you understand your story well. If you’re a Snowflaker or an outliner, you may want to take a first cut at your storyline before you start writing. We recommend that you revisit your storyline frequently, constantly honing it to make it sharper, brighter, and more potent.
  The following steps can help you compose a storyline. You may want to experiment first by writing storylines for some published novels — we provide some example storylines in the next section. When you’re ready, you can take a shot at writing a storyline for your own novel.

  1.  Pick the character to focus your storyline on.

    Normally, this is your lead character, but it can also be your villain or someone else. Here are some questions to jiggle your neurons to help you find your best storyline:

•Which of your characters has the biggest contradiction in his values? (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of character values.)

• Which of your characters plays the strongest role in the story?

• Which of your characters has the toughest obstacle or the biggest paradox?

•What is the story goal for each of your primary characters? (See Chapter 7 for an explanation of story goals.)

  2.  Write a sentence about that character that suggests a possible story question.

    The story question asks whether your character will succeed or fail to meet his story goal (see Chapters 6 and 7 for more on story questions).

  3.  Edit the sentence.

    Writing a strong storyline takes a lot of practice, and you may not get yours right on the first try. (If you do, you’re probably a marketing genius.) Getting it wrong the first ten or twenty tries is perfectly okay, so long as you get it right the last time. So ask yourself some questions — is the character interesting? Is the plot simple? Are the words emotive?

Do you need to establish a setting? Can you backload the sentence with either surprise or emotional zing?
    Remember: A storyline must strip out everything that isn’t essential. It must even throw away many elements that are essential at lower levels in your story structure. Be ruthless in simplifying your storyline. The question isn’t how much you can pack in; the question is how much you can take out and still make a lasting impression.

  4.  Save it for later.

    Your storyline almost certainly isn’t perfect. Look at it again next week or next month and try to improve on it. For some tips on reworking your storyline, flip to Chapter 13.
Examples: Looking at storylines for 20 best-selling novels
Please remember that writing a storyline is an art, not a science. There’s really no one best way to write a storyline. The purpose of a storyline is to arouse interest — to make your target reader say, “Ooh! Tell me more.”The best way to figure out how to write a storyline is to look at some examples. Try your hand at writing storylines for the following novels, and then compare your efforts to ours. Practice won’t make perfect, but it will make you better. In the publishing game, better may be good enough.

Here are storylines for 20 novels, in alphabetical order by title. Our examples range from 14 to 27 words, with an average of about 19 words. Study these examples. If you work at it, you can probably do better.

  ✓ Blink, by Ted Dekker (Christian thriller): “A young Saudi woman on the run from her family links up with a Berkeley physics prodigy who is just discovering that he can see the future.”
   What makes this storyline work is its unconventional mix: The devout Muslim woman and the agnostic physics student create an irresistible lure to Dekker’s core audience, conservative Christians who love a taut thriller. We’ve backloaded the one paranormal element — seeing the future — that makes this story special.

  ✓ The Clan of the Cave Bear, by Jean Auel (historical): “A young human girl in Ice Age Europe struggles to survive persecution by her adoptive clan of Neanderthals.”
   Here we mention only one character, the young human girl Ayla, who is 4 at the beginning of the story. Why don’t we mention the other characters in the story? Because less is more. By not mentioning them specifically, we leave room for the zinger at the end — she lives among Neanderthals. This is another example of backloading the emotive punch.

  ✓ Contact, by Carl Sagan (science fiction): “A young female astronomer discovers radio signals from alien beings in a nearby star system.”
   This storyline highlights the gender of the central character, cutting against the grain of the stereotypical male scientist. This automatically arouses empathy, because the protagonist is an outsider. The word alien is always good for emotive appeal, especially in science fiction.

  ✓ The Da Vinci Code, by Dan Brown (thriller): “A Harvard symbologist and a female French cryptographer solve the puzzle of the Holy Grail in a race against death across Europe.”
   Highlighting male and female characters promises a bit of romantic tension, which is always good, even if it’s not central to the story. In this case, the storyline is already high-octane, with three separate phrases that generate emotive responses: “Holy Grail” connotes religion, “race against death” is a stock phrase for thrillers, and “Europe” adds an exotic flavor that appeals to Americans.

  ✓ The Firm, by John Grisham (legal thriller): “A brilliant young lawyer gets a fabulous job at a firm that is a cover for a Mafia money-laundering operation.”
   This storyline focuses on a single character, shifting him rapidly from  a high positive (“fabulous job”) to a high negative (“Mafia money-laundering operation.”) A little hype at the beginning (“brilliant young lawyer”) is standard practice, whereas a kicker is backloaded at the end.

✓ Girl with a Pearl Earring, by Tracy Chevalier (literary historical): “A young servant girl in 17th-century Holland lies at the center of a marital dispute in the home of renowned painter Johannes Vermeer.”
   This storyline, like the story itself, is painted in muted colors. We back-load the sentence by naming the famous artist who plays a central role in the story.

  ✓ Gorky Park, by Martin Cruz Smith (mystery): “A Moscow homicide detective investigates a bizarre triple murder and runs afoul of the KGB and FBI.”
   Homicide detectives are commonplace characters, so we focus first on what makes this one special: he works in Moscow. We follow up with the word bizarre, a hype word acceptable for storylines in this genre. The reader isn’t surprised that a Moscow cop might ruffle KGB feathers, but we drastically raise the stakes by backloading the sentence with the word FBI. The reader of this genre will demand to know why the FBI may be in cahoots with the KGB.

  ✓ The Hunt for Red October, by Tom Clancy (military technothriller): “A Russian sub captain leads the Soviet navy on a merry chase while he tries to hand over the latest Soviet submarine to the Americans.”
   This storyline focuses on a lesser character, the Russian sub captain. We don’t mention the protagonist of the story at all — Clancy’s meal-ticket character Jack Ryan. Why not? Because if you have a powerful enough story question, then a powerful hero is implied. Ryan is a strong character, but we don’t need him to pique interest. Our storyline is loaded with emotive hit points that were particularly potent in the early 1980s, as the Cold War came to its peak.

  ✓ The Kite Runner, by Khaled Hosseini (literary): “A boy raised in Afghanistan grows up with the shame of having failed to fight the gang of boys who raped his closest friend.”
   We start with a word designed to intrigue the reader: Afghanistan. Given the author’s name, the reader will immediately guess that the novel is an insider look at that mysterious country. We follow up on this with a series of emotive hits — shame, failed, fight, gang, raped, friend. The sto-ryline promises something different, and the book delivers.

  ✓ The Lord of the Rings, by J. R. R. Tolkien (fantasy): “A hobbit learns that destroying his magic ring is the key to saving Middle Earth from the Dark Lord.”
   Notice how very many characters we’ve left out of this storyline: The wizards, the elves, the orcs, the Ents, Gollum, Shelob, Tom Bombadil. We’ve also left out all the important places: The Shire, Rivendell, Lothlorien, Rohan, Minas Tirith, even Mordor. We’ve stripped it down to our hero Frodo and the Dark Lord. In a battle between good and evil, just showing the symbol of good and the symbol of evil is okay.

✓ The Lovely Bones, by Alice Sebold (literary): “A young girl watches the turmoil in her family from heaven after being raped and murdered by a neighbor.”
   This storyline highlights the unusual story premise — watching from heaven. Note how we backload several traumatic words (“raped and murdered by a neighbor”). The story is too harrowing for some readers, and this storyline tells them immediately that they won’t be able to handle it.

  ✓ The Man From St. Petersburg, by Ken Follett (historical thriller): “In 1914, a Russian anarchist tries to assassinate the aristocrat who is negotiating his country’s entrance into World War I.”
   This storyline starts with a date, 1914, which is necessary info for any historical novel. Now count the emotive hit points: “Russian anarchist,” “assassinate,” “aristocrat,” “World War I.” If you’ve read this novel, you know that the story has four major characters, each with an important story thread, and that a young Winston Churchill also plays a significant role. We’ve chosen to mention only one major character (the assassin), along with one minor character (the Russian nobleman). Why skip over three major characters? Because less is more. Focus your storyline down to the sharpest point you can. Why skip over Churchill? Because we couldn’t figure out a way to do so without overinflating the storyline. See whether you can improve this storyline by adding Churchill and subtracting something else.

  ✓ My Name is Asher Lev, by Chaim Potok (literary): “An orthodox Jewish artist struggles to reconcile his art, his religion, and his family.”
   Here we highlight an intrinsic personal conflict — orthodox Judaism historically ignored the visual arts because the Second Commandment prohibits making images. To excel in his work, the artist Asher Lev must cut against the grain of centuries of tradition. We backload this storyline with the words “his family,” which highlight the fact that religious rebels always pay a heavy personal cost.

  ✓ Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon (time-travel romance): “A young English nurse searches for the way back home after time-traveling from 1945 to 1743 Scotland.”
   Don’t underestimate the power of a simple word like home. Going home again carries enormous emotive overtones for many readers. Because this is a time-travel novel that doesn’t begin in the present day, the storyline shows both endpoints in time. We’ve backloaded this sentence with a date and place (1743 Scotland) that will carry some freight for any reader who knows about Bonnie Prince Charlie and the failed Jacobite Rising  in 1745.

✓ The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follett (historical thriller): “A stone-mason in 12th-century England battles to build his life’s dream, a  cathedral.”
   This book is widely agreed to be Follett’s finest work, yet the storyline is stark. We have a lowly stonemason trying to build a cathedral. The storyline only needs to spark interest. Either the reader cares whether a lone stonemason can build a cathedral, or she doesn’t. The storyline should arouse curiosity in those who care, and it should warn off those who don’t.

  ✓ Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen (romance): “A young English woman from a peculiar family is pursued by an arrogant and wealthy young man.”
   This storyline puts on display the weaknesses of both the young woman (“from a peculiar family”) and her suitor (“arrogant”). It raises the questions of whether the man will succeed and whether the reader should want him to.

  ✓ River God, by Wilbur Smith (historical action-adventure): “A genius eunuch slave in 18th-century B.C.E. Egypt must survive palace intrigues between his mistress and her evil father.”
   In this example, we show three characters: the slave, his female owner, and her father. The conflict pits two against one, but even so, it’s clearly an unfair battle. Neither a slave nor a woman carries the political clout of a man of high birth. We highlight two features of high interest in one character here — the slave is both a genius and a eunuch. Both features make him unusual.

  ✓ The Speed of Dark, by Elizabeth Moon (literary): “An autistic savant must choose whether to accept a new treatment that would make him normal and change his identity forever.”
   This storyline mentions only one character, one who’s intrinsically inter-esting: an “autistic savant.” Again, we’ve backloaded the sentence with a kicker that appeals to a broad audience (“change his identity forever”). Most people would resist very strongly any attempt to change their identities. Why do we use the word forever? Isn’t that already implied? Perhaps, but it carries emotive freight, so we can justify using the extra word.

  ✓ The Spy Who Came In from the Cold, by John le Carré (spy thriller): “A British spy ‘retires in disgrace’ as cover for a deeply laid plan to entrap the head of counterespionage in East Berlin.”
   This storyline defines the hook for one of the finest spy novels ever written. Everybody loves a sting operation, especially in a spy novel. Count the emotive hit points: “British spy,” “disgrace,” “entrap,” “counter-espionage,” and “East Berlin.” This novel is essential reading for anyone who writes thrillers.

✓ The Time Traveler’s Wife, by Audrey Niffenegger (literary): “A young girl grows up in the company of a strange time-traveling visitor who appears and disappears at random.”
    We highlight the chaotic relationship at the center of this novel by using the words strange and random.

Three-Act Structure: Setting Up Three Disasters

A novel needs to be simple enough to explain in a single sentence, but it  also needs to be complex enough to fill up a few hundred pages and engage your reader for hours. We now discuss the next level of complexity after the storyline — the well-known three-act structure, which is widely used to analyze stories. This structure does the following:

  ✓ It lets you hold the main points of the story in your head in one coherent flow.

  ✓ It lets you communicate those main points to industry professionals in a way they’re expecting (as we discuss later in “Summarizing Your Three-Act Structure for Interested Parties”). 
In this section, we show you why three-act structure is important, break down the acts, explain how to escalate a story’s excitement, and give you some hints on timing.
  You may be wondering whether using three acts is required for a novel. No, of course not. There are no unbreakable rules in fiction; you can use any structure for your novel that works. However, we strongly recommend mastering the three-act structure because it fits the structure of so many novels. Everyone in the industry understands this structure, so it gives you a tool for communicating your story to other people. It also works. Even if you decide that the three-act structure isn’t right for your novel, you’ll find it valuable to ponder why it doesn’t work for your novel. That should give you some deep insights into your story.

Looking at the value of  a three-act structure

When you have an agent interested in your storyline, you need to give her the bones of the story next: the setup, a sequence of major disasters (each worse than the one before), and then the ending. That’s the three-act structure.

Imagine a scenario where you met an agent at a writing conference earlier and gave her a one-sentence storyline that got you to first base: She asked you for an appointment (we give you this scenario earlier in “Understanding the value of a storyline”). We now take that scenario a little further to show why three-act structure is important. Suppose you sit down with the agent to discuss your novel, and all she knows so far is that your story is about a bus driver who’s having dreams about a terrorist attack on Disneyland, just like the dreams he was having in September 2001:
Naturally, you’re a bit nervous as you begin the session. You’ve never done one of these 15-minute appointments before, but the agent evidently has. “I really like your storyline,” she says. “Tell me more about your story.”
You fold both hands in your lap to keep them from shaking. “Well, so he calls Homeland Security, and they believe him, and together they stop the terrorist attack.”
The agent’s mouth drops open, and she stares at you for a few seconds. 
“That’s not a novel,” she says. “That’s a newspaper report. Is that all there is to your story?”
Great drops of sweat slither down your sides. “That’s all I’ve got so far, but it’s a start, isn’t it?”
No, it isn’t a start. It’s the end of this interview, because you really have no story. A story needs conflict. Obstacles. Disasters. What kind of disasters? 
Disasters that escalate. Here we rewind a bit to show you what happens if you have a three-act structure with a series of increasingly bad disasters. We begin with your response when the agent asks for more information about your story:
You fold both hands in your lap to keep them from shaking. “Well, so he calls Homeland Security every day for a week, and they finally commit him to a psychiatric institution for observation for 72 hours.”
The agent leans forward in her chair. “I like that. That’s a pretty good disaster. So what does he do then?”
You take a deep breath and feel your pulse start to slow down a little. 
“After two days, he calls this girl he knows on his cellphone and she helps him escape, but now the cops launch a manhunt.”
The agent is nodding encouragement. “Good, good. Then what?”
A faint smile tugs at the edges of your mouth. “He has another dream that reveals the terrorists’ timeline, but then there’s a shootout with the cops and the girl gets wounded and captured.”
The agent returns your smile. “Then what?”

You’re feeling much calmer now. “He goes to the hospital where she’s under heavy guard, lures the cops into a high-speed chase through most of L.A., and leads them to the terrorists’ weapons cache.”
The agent leans back in her chair and studies you for a long moment. 
“Have you got a sample chapter I could look at?”
If the agent asks for a sample, it all comes down to whether you can write. 
Maybe you can; maybe you can’t. But presenting your three-act structure can earn you the right to be read.

Timing the acts and disasters

Aristotle famously said that a story has a beginning, a middle, and an end. The three parts of the three-act structure correspond exactly to Aristotle’s beginning, middle, and end. Act 1 is the beginning; Act 2, the middle; and  Act 3, the end.
  We believe that a powerful technique for punctuating the three-act structure is what we call the three-disaster structure. The three-disaster structure is just a piece of the three-act structure, but it’s an important piece. The acts are the large pieces of the story; the disasters are the points that connect them. We like to think of the timing of the three-act structure like a football game, as  follows:

  1.  Act 1 takes up roughly the first quarter and ends with a major disaster.

    The first disaster comes at the end of Act 1 and links it to Act 2.

  2.  Act 2 takes up the second and third quarters, and each quarter ends with an even worse disaster.

    The second disaster comes at the midpoint of Act 2 (ending the second quarter) and serves as an antidote to what people often call the sagging middle. The third disaster strikes at the end of Act 2 (ending the third quarter) and links it to Act 3.

  3.  Act 3 takes up the last quarter and includes a climax (also called a resolution), which answers the story question — the question of whether your lead character will succeed.

    The climax typically falls late in the fourth quarter, and everything after it serves to wind down the story.
Here’s how the three-act structure works: Tension rises in Act 1, which ends in a disaster that fully commits the lead character to the story. Tension rises further until the middle of Act 2, when a second disaster strikes, even worse than the first. After a brief recovery, the tension ramps up even harder, right up to the end of Act 2, when the third and worst disaster breaks. This forces the lead character to find a way to resolve the story somewhere in Act 3.

Introducing a great beginning

The beginning of your story (Act 1) takes the reader into your story world and introduces the main characters. They may not yet have a story goal. They may simply be living life and trying to get by. Or they may each have rather dull and boring goals they’re trying to reach. Or they may know from the very first paragraph what important story goals they want.
Consider the beginning of a classic movie, Star Wars Episode 4: A New Hope. This first Star Wars movie caused an enormous sensation when it released in 1977. (Note: The story actually appeared first as a novel — George Lucas’s Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker — published a few months before the movie hit screens.)
In the beginning of the story, young Luke Skywalker takes possession of two droids bearing a mysterious message from a beautiful princess. The princess is begging for help. Luke would help her if he could, but he has no idea who she is, what she needs, or what he can do for her.
The droid R2-D2 escapes, and Luke pursues him. After being attacked by vicious sand-people, Luke meets Obi-Wan Kenobi, the intended recipient of the message. Kenobi tells him that the droid has plans for the Death Star, which must be taken to the planet Alderaan to help the rebel alliance defeat the Emperor. He asks Luke to join him. Luke refuses reluctantly. He’s already given his word to stay at his dull farming job with Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru through the season. He can’t just pick up and leave the planet, can he?
Luke would like to join this story, but he can’t commit. He needs something to force him to make a break with the past. What might cause him to commit? What causes the lead character in most novels to commit irrevocably to the story? It takes a disaster — something to reset the character’s priorities.

The end of the beginning: Getting commitment with the first disaster

By the end of Act 1, each character must know his or her story goal and must be firmly committed to it. Why committed? Because if the characters won’t commit, then the reader won’t, either.

The purpose of the beginning of your novel is to bring your lead character to a point of no return. Before this point, he can refuse his role as lead character of the story. After this point, he’s all in and he isn’t going back. Your lead character commits (and your reader commits) when you give him a disaster that brings his role in the story into sharp focus. Generally, no small disaster will do; it needs to be something big, something life-changing. At that point, your reader emotionally commits to your story for the long haul, because she wants to see the story question answered: Will the lead character achieve his story goal, or won’t he?
In Star Wars, Luke and General Kenobi discover a ruined transport — the one owned by the jawas from whom Luke’s uncle bought the droids. In a flash, Luke realizes that his uncle and aunt are in horrible danger. He leaps in his transport and flies back home. He arrives at the farm and finds Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru murdered, slaughtered by Storm Troopers.
That’s the first major disaster. Luke makes his decision instantly. He no longer owes his aunt and uncle labor. Instead, he owes them vengeance. He decides to leave the planet and join the Rebellion. He’ll go to Alderaan with Kenobi and help destroy the Death Star.
Until now, Luke has had small and unimportant goals. Now he has a big one. He has a story goal, and it drives the rest of the story: Join the Rebellion and destroy the Death Star. The disaster has turned Luke from a dithering farm boy into a man with a mission. That’s the purpose of the first disaster. The beginning is over, and the long middle of the story has begun.

Supporting the middle with  a second major disaster

The middle of your novel (Act 2) takes up at least half of your book, just as the second and third quarters of a football game take up half the game. Many things happen in the middle act; the problem is that no matter how interesting they are, they all start looking alike after a while.
What’s the solution? Another disaster. Something bigger than the one before. Something that snaps your lead character’s head back hard enough to give him a concussion. This disaster should come at roughly the midpoint of your story.
  Your lead character will have numerous smaller setbacks throughout the second act. However, the second disaster will be major — the worst thing that’s happened in the story so far.

In Star Wars, the intrepid Luke and General Kenobi join forces with Han Solo and Chewbacca. After some adventures in the cantina, they escape Luke’s home planet on the Millennium Falcon and pop into hyperspace for a trip to Alderaan. When they arrive, they find the planet gone, which is bad, but it carries no serious emotive punch for Luke. He didn’t personally know any of the billions of dead. This isn’t the disaster you’re looking for.
The Death Star pulls in Luke’s ship with a tractor beam. He and the others hide out, sneak aboard the Death Star, and then discover and rescue Princess Leia. Obi-Wan Kenobi disables the tractor beam. As they all head back to the ship to escape, Darth Vader intercepts Kenobi and the two warriors battle with light sabers. The viewer expects an exciting battle and an even more exciting escape. Instead, Vader kills Kenobi.
That’s a disaster, and it’s huge. Kenobi was Luke’s mentor, and he was the effective leader of the group. Psychologically, they’ve been decapitated. They escape the Death Star, fight off the pursuit, and set course for the rebel planet. Luke continues training in the Force. Luke and Leia are intent on fighting in the rebellion. Han Solo intends to collect his reward and pay off Jabba the Hutt. The problem now is that this story could go on forever, or the heroic team could splinter. What’s going to force this story to end — and  end well?

Leading to the end: Tackling  the third disaster

Your story needs some reason to focus itself on an ending. That reason normally comes from a new major disaster, the third and worst. Like the first disaster, this one forces a decision. But this time, the decision is mutual between hero and villain. It’s a decision on both sides to pursue a final con-frontation, and it comes at the end of Act 2.
  Please note that the third disaster/decision is not the final confrontation itself. The decision leads up to the final confrontation, which you show in Act 3. Everything that comes after this third disaster/decision forms the ending of your story.
In Star Wars, the third disaster comes when the rebels discover that they’ve been tracked by the Death Star. It’s approaching their base quickly. When it arrives, it’ll annihilate the rebel planet, which has been the secret base of operations. The rebel alliance now faces a decision. Should they run for it, scattering in a thousand directions? Or should they stand and fight the Death Star, using the information in R2-D2’s memory?

They choose to stand and fight. That’s the decision that launches the ending. Note that this decision is irrevocable. If they win, they’ll never have to face the Death Star again. If they lose, there won’t be enough of them left to scrape off the Emperor’s shoe. They have to win — and so does the Death Star.
  Your third disaster need not be the actual occurrence of a catastrophe. It can be the threat of a catastrophe. The important feature is that it forces the final showdown. That’s its purpose in the story structure. You may argue that the approach of the Death Star doesn’t seem like a disaster, because nothing horrible has happened yet. You’d probably feel differently if you were on the rebel planet watching the approach of the Death Star, knowing that within a few hours, it may kill you, shatter the rebellion, and leave the galaxy helpless in the hands of the evil emperor.

Wrapping up: Why endings  work — or don’t

The ending (Act 3) now follows from the decision to pursue a final confrontation (see the preceding section). There’s preparation, of course. Both sides get ready. Both know that the difference between victory and defeat is a razor-blade’s width. The battle could go either way, but neither side will back down.
  An ending must answer the story question of whether the main character will achieve his story goal. (See Chapters 6 and 7 for details on story questions.) A story question must be objective, simple, important, achievable, and difficult. You have three options as a storyteller:

  ✓ Happy ending: Answer the story question with a “yes, hooray!”

  ✓ Unhappy ending: Answer the story question with a “no, boohoo.”

  ✓ Bittersweet ending: Answer the story question with a “yes, but” or with a “no, but.”

Any of these endings work, as long as the answer follows from the characters’ values and is plausible within the story world you’ve created.
  Your ending will not work if you do any of the following:

  ✓ You fail to answer the story question at all.

  ✓ You answer the story question in a way that rings false to the values of the characters.

✓ You answer the story question in a way that violates the basic rules of your story world. This is often called a deus ex machina (“god from the machine”) ending, named after the annoying habit of Greek tragedians to resolve their stories by lowering a god from a crane onto the stage to wrap up the story. Aristotle criticized Euripedes for rescuing Medea in just this way.
In Star Wars, the story question is “Will Luke and his friends defeat the Empire by destroying the Death Star?” This question comes into clear focus at the end of Act I.
The rebels have a tiny hope of victory — they must fire a precisely aimed proton torpedo into a small hatch in the exterior of the Death Star. But the approach to the hatch will take them through a heavily armed trench. Before they can reach the trench, they must fight through a swarm of TIE fighters. Han Solo’s piloting skills make him ideal for the mission, but he leaves to pay his debt to Jabba the Hutt. The deck is stacked against the alliance, but they do have Luke, and Luke has the Force.
The battle rages, and many rebels are blasted apart. At last, Luke is alone in the trench with a single remaining proton torpedo. If he can fire it, he might destroy the Death Star. But Darth Vader is on his tail in a TIE fighter and gaining on him. It’s clear that Vader will fire first. This race between Luke and Vader is the final confrontation.
Then there’s an explosion. Darth Vader has been winged by Han Solo, who is joining in the battle after all. Vader spirals away, out of the game. Luke fires his proton torpedo. It zooms down the hatch into the guts of the Death Star. A brilliant explosion lights up the galaxy. That explosion is the climax of the story.
But why does Han Solo return? Is this a deus ex machina? Not at all. Han Solo left in the first place because it was logical for him to leave, given his values. He came back because it was logical for him to return, given his values. (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of values and the importance of giving your characters conflicting values.)
Han Solo values two things: His life and his reputation. Repeatedly through the movie, you see Solo doing things to rescue himself and others, and he makes it clear that he likes being alive. But you also see him flinch when Princess Leia or Luke insults him. Han Solo sees himself as a bold, adventurous cowboy, afraid of nothing, able to shoot a bounty hunter in a cantina while wearing a cool, nonchalant grin.
Han decides to skip out of the final battle because he wants to pay off Jabba the Hutt, who’s put a price on his head. That’s reasonable, because Solo values his life. But Luke accuses him of being a coward before he leaves. That nettles Han more than he’s willing to admit. He leaves the planet, but he can’t get that accusation out of his head. Is he a coward? No. He’s afraid of nothing. Han finally decides that he’d rather risk his life than be thought a coward. So he returns, rescues Luke from Vader, and enables the defeat of the Death Star. Ultimately, it’s the victory of one of Han Solo’s values over another that makes the ending of Star Wars work.

Summarizing Your Three-Act Structure for Interested Parties

  When selling your story to an agent or editor, we recommend that you present your three-act structure as a five-sentence paragraph with this format:

  1.  The first sentence sets up the story by introducing the lead characters and the story world.

  2.  The second sentence summarizes the beginning and presents the first disaster to force a decision that frames the story question.

  3.  The third sentence summarizes the first part of the middle, leading up to the second disaster.

  4.  The fourth sentence summarizes the second part of the middle, leading up to the third disaster, which forces a decision to pursue the final confrontation.

  5.  The fifth sentence explains how the story ends, including the final confrontation and any wrap-up that you feel you need to explain.

In this section, we provide some example paragraphs that summarize three-act structures, and we help you write your own.

Examples: Summarizing The Matarese Circle and Pride and Prejudice

Before you try writing a three-act structure for your novel, check out some examples. We can summarize the three-act structure of Robert Ludlum’s  classic spy novel The Matarese Circle in a paragraph — the three disasters are in italics:

Brandon Scofield is an aging U.S. covert agent who’s been inexplicably pushed out of the service on an idiotic pretext. After evading an assassination attempt, he discovers that his own government is trying to kill him and that his only hope is to join forces with Vasili Taleniekov, the ex-KGB agent who murdered Scofield’s wife. Forging an uneasy alliance, Scofield and Taleniekov uncover a shadowy international conspiracy led by corporate billionaires, but the stakes rise when one of the billionaires is murdered by his controller. After pursuing leads in Russia, Germany, and England, Scofield must make a hard decision when his girlfriend Toni and his ally Taleniekov are kidnapped by the conspirators, who invite Scofield to surrender to them in Boston. Scofield flies to Boston, discovers one final shattering secret, and then walks unarmed into the lair of the conspirators to “surrender.”
The Matarese Circle is arguably Robert Ludlum’s finest single-book work. (Ludlum also authored a three-book series involving Jason Bourne, which is his best-known work.) The Matarese Circle is a complex plot-driven book, so the paragraph about three-act structure is necessarily complex. We’ve hinted at the ending without giving it away. Now we analyze the three disasters:

  ✓ Scofield discovers that his own government tried to kill him and that he must team up with his archenemy Taleniekov to survive. This disaster forces Scofield into the wrenching decision to join up with Taleniekov.

  ✓ One of the billionaire conspirators is murdered by his controller. This escalates the tension. When you discover that the powerful enemy you feared is a weak pawn in the hands of someone even more powerful, your stakes go up dramatically.

  ✓ Scofield’s girlfriend Toni and his ally Taleniekov are kidnapped. This third disaster forces Scofield’s terrifying decision to agree to a final confrontation with the shadowy circle of conspirators.
Now we consider a complex character-driven novel, Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice, which has many strong characters and several story threads. Here is our one-paragraph summary of its three-act structure, taking care to focus on the main story thread — the romance between Lizzie Bennet and Mr. Darcy:
When Lizzie Bennet and her sisters meet some wealthy young men at a ball, Lizzie takes a keen dislike to one of them, Mr. Darcy. Lizzie’s sister Jane falls in love with Darcy’s friend Mr. Bingley, and Lizzie takes an interest in Mr. Wickham — whom she then learns has been financially ruined by Darcy. When Lizzie visits her married friend in Hunsford some months later, Mr. Darcy seeks her out and proposes marriage to her, but she rejects him flat out. Lizzie soon finds out that Darcy is a better man than she had thought, and she is beginning to regret her rejection when her sister Lydia runs away to live in sin with Mr. Wickham. When Lizzie learns that Mr. Darcy rescued her sister’s reputation and when he learns that she no longer hates him, the two realize that they were made for each other.
Note that this analysis presents the story with Lizzie as the lead character, but all three disasters are disasters from Darcy’s point of view. Here are the disasters:

  ✓ Wickham tells Lizzie that Darcy financially ruined him. This lie causes Lizzie to treat Darcy even more coldly. However, Darcy is a man who decides on a thing and then stays resolute to it. He continues to pursue Lizzie, however hopeless it seems.

  ✓ Darcy bungles his marriage proposal, offending Lizzie badly and causing her to burn her bridges in rejecting him. Darcy now knows that he has no chance, and yet he remains hopelessly in love with her.

  ✓ Wickham runs off with Lizzie’s sister Lydia, ruining the marriage prospects of all five sisters. Darcy is tormented by this, knowing that Wickham could not have seduced Lydia if he, Darcy, had not kept silent about Wickham’s evil character. He decides to rescue Lydia, and this decision leads to the happy ending with Lizzie.

Describing your own three-act structure

  We want to reiterate that you can develop your three-act structure at any time, depending on which creative paradigm works best for you (see Chapter 4 for details on these writing methods). If now is a good time to write your three-act structure, then here are some steps that should help you develop a one-para-graph summary that you can use to explain your story to an interested agent or editor:

  1.  Write a first sentence that introduces one or more characters and sets up the conflict.

    Name your principal characters and tell any essential information. You may even include key backstory details.

  2.  Write three sentences, each describing a major disaster in your story.

    The three disasters should be from a single character’s point of view, usually the lead character’s.

  3.  Write a final sentence that explains how you resolve the story.

    If you don’t reveal the details of the resolution, you should at least give some clear hints about how the story question will be answered.

4.  Rework the sentence containing your first disaster, adding in the decision that sets the story goal.

  5.  Rework the sentence containing your third disaster, explaining why it forces the final confrontation.

  6.  Polish the entire paragraph until it flows naturally.

  7.  Save your one-paragraph summary in a safe place and come back to it periodically and make sure that it actually describes the story you’re writing.

    You can change this paragraph if you need to. It’s okay for your story to evolve as you get to understand your characters better and as you discover what really drives your story.

MARGINALIA:

Bending the rules with Transgression

At book signings, Randy sold many copies of his first novel, Transgression, using an 11-word storyline: “A physicist travels back in time to kill the apostle Paul.” That always got either a yawn or a wow response. Randy followed up the wowsers with the sentence, “By the way, I’m a physicist myself, and I know all about time travel.”
Notice that Randy bent one of his guidelines (he gave the name of the apostle Paul, a famous character) because that added a high emotive punch, which was all the stronger because it was backloaded to the end of the sentence.If you’ve read Transgression, then you know that neither of the two primary characters in the story are even mentioned in the storyline. That’s okay. The point of this storyline was to raise the story question: Will the physicist kill that pesky Paul, or won’t he?

Additional reading for high-level story structureHere are some of our favorite books that deal with high-level story structure:

 ✓  Plot  &  Structure,  by  James  Scott  Bell (Writer’s  Digest):  This  book  is  ideal  for beginning writers, although writers at all levels find it useful.

 ✓  Techniques of the Selling Writer, by Dwight Swain (University of Oklahoma Press): We especially recommend to you the chapters titled  “Fiction  Strategy”  and  “Beginning, Middle, End” for plenty of detailed info on story structure.

 ✓  The  Writer’s  Journey,  by  Christopher Vogler (Michael Wiese Productions): This book expands the usual three-act structure into  a  12-step  “Hero’s  Journey.”  Vogler calls the first disaster crossing the threshold. Depending on the story, he calls either the second or third disaster the ordeal.



}
{


Chapter 9

Synopsis, Scene List, and Scene: Your Middle Layers of Plot

In This Chapter

Deciding which layer to write first

Writing a two-page synopsis

Writing your scene list

structuring scenes

The modern novel’s plot typically has six layers of complexity. In Chapter 8, we discuss the two highest layers of plot, the storyline and the three-act structure. In this chapter, we look at the middle three layers: synopsis, scene list, and scene. We cover the lowest layer of plot — action, dialogue, and all that — in Chapter 10. 
Before looking at the middle layers in detail, consider the order in which you’d like to work on your story structure. The next section gives you a run-down on the approach you should use regarding your writing order.

Deciding Which Order to Work In

Sometimes success depends on doing things in the right order. If you put on your socks first and then your shoes, your day will go a lot smoother than if you put on your shoes first and then your socks. But sometimes, the order doesn’t matter. Your day will go just as well, whether you put on your left or your right sock first. Yet you probably put them on in the same order every day because putting one of them on first feels right.
Developing your story structure is one of those things where the order doesn’t matter, though you probably do have a preference. In Chapter 4, we talk about the importance of having a creative paradigm, which sets the order in which you create your novel. All that really matters is that you choose the creative paradigm that works best for you. In Chapter 4, we list four very common ones (Seat-of-the-Pants, Edit-As-You-Go, Snowflake, Outline), but you’re free to develop your own paradigm that works best for you.
Your creative paradigm will likely be either bottom-up or top-down:

  ✓ Top-down: A top-down paradigm starts with the highest layer of complexity and works down to the details. The Snowflake paradigm is a top-down approach, because you start with a high-level concept — a storyline — and expand it to a three-act structure and go on to lower and more detailed layers of complexity. The Outline paradigm is also a top-down approach. 
   If you prefer a top-down approach, read this chapter in order: You first see how to write a synopsis, then a scene list, and then a scene.
   When you’re ready to create your story structure, write your storyline first and then define the three-act structure of your novel, using the ideas in Chapter 8. After you have those, write a synopsis and then a scene list using the ideas in this chapter.

  ✓ Bottom-up: A bottom-up paradigm starts with the lowest layer of complexity — the actual words of the story — and organizes it in higher and higher levels. The Seat-of-the-Pants paradigm is a bottom-up approach, because you write your story first and then you analyze it later and eventually you figure out what it all means. Likewise, the Edit-As-You-Go paradigm is bottom-up. 
   If you prefer a bottom-up approach, read the main sections of this chapter in reverse order. You see first how to structure your scenes, then how to make a scene list, and then how to write a synopsis.
   When you’re ready to create your story, write your first draft first and then analyze each scene’s structure to make sure it’s pulling its weight as a scene. When you know that all your scenes are well-structured, make a scene list and rearrange your scenes to be in the best possible order. Then write your synopsis from your scene list. If it’s a good synopsis, you should be able to summarize it into a single paragraph that represents the three-act structure that we discuss in Chapter 8. When you have a solid one-paragraph summary, boil it down to a one-sentence summary, and you’ll have the storyline that we talk about in Chapter 8.

Writing the Synopsis

Almost always, you must have a synopsis to sell your novel. A synopsis is a document roughly two pages long that describes your plot, and it’s an essential part of your book’s sales process. To get an agent, or to sell your book to a publisher, you need to write a query or a proposal (see Chapter 16 for all the details on writing these). Either an agent or a publisher will want to see a synopsis. Therefore, knowing how to write a good synopsis is mandatory for every novelist. 
Writing a two-page synopsis seems to be the most traumatic writing experience many novelists ever face. We’ve seen excellent writers paralyzed because they didn’t know what’s expected. Not only that, many editors agree that the synopsis is boring. Most writers hate writing the synopsis and tend to write either too much or too little. In this section, we show you the simple principles you need to get it right and do it quickly.There really isn’t any mystery. Here are the basics:

  ✓ Write in third person.

  ✓ Write in present tense.

  ✓ Summarize your entire story in about two single-spaced pages. That gives you about 1,000 words.

A typical novel has around 100 scenes. If you include every single one in a synopsis of 1,000 words, then you’d have to shrink every scene down to 10 words, which is just not enough. What’s a writer to do?
  Each paragraph in your synopsis should summarize a sequence of related scenes, not a single scene. A sequence may be anywhere from three to seven scenes. The paragraph strips that sequence down to the essentials, focusing on those scenes that are most important and skipping completely over scenes that are peripheral.
You have two easy ways to build your synopsis, depending on whether you’re working top-down or bottom-up: Either you start with your three-act structure and flesh it out, or you start with your scene list and slim it down.

Taking it from the top: Fleshing  out your three-act structure

If you’re a top-down thinker, then start with your three-act structure. (See Chapter 8 for a thorough explanation of the three-act structure.) You should have a one-paragraph summary that defines your three-act structure. That paragraph has five sentences. Expand them as follows:

  1.  Expand the first sentence (the story setup) into a paragraph or two, describing the story backdrop.

2.  Expand the second sentence (leading up to the first disaster) into about half a page.

    Use two or three paragraphs to tell how you’ll get to your crucial first disaster and the decision that defines your story question.

  3.  Expand the third sentence (leading up to the second disaster) into another half page.

    Again, use no more than three or four paragraphs to summarize the high points of the story. Don’t worry about glossing over details or ignoring some story threads. Cut to the bone.

  4.  Expand the fourth sentence (leading up to the third disaster) into yet another half page.

    Once again, use no more than three or four paragraphs. Be brutal in leaving out details. The publisher does not care about those cool subplots you cooked up; the publisher cares whether the main story works.

  5.  Expand the fifth sentence (the ending) into three paragraphs that tell how the ending works out.

  You really don’t need any more than that for your synopsis. Don’t allow a mere two pages of typing to traumatize you. You may find that your synopsis is boring. Guess what — editors expect it to be boring. Your synopsis is like a table of contents; its purpose is to show that you have enough meat in your story to fill up a book. Nobody reads a table of contents for entertainment, and nobody reads a synopsis for entertainment, either.

Bottoms up! Building around  sequences of scenes

If you’re a bottom-up thinker, then you can use your scene list to create a synopsis. Your scene list (which we discuss later in “Developing Your Scene List”) will be much too long, so you have to trim it down harshly. Here’s how:

  1.  Cut and paste your list of scenes into a fresh document in your word processor.

    This probably means that you’ll have about 100 very short paragraphs in your document to start with. Your goal is to combine these into 15 to 20 longer paragraphs, taking up no more than two pages.

  2.  Start at the top, scan down through the first few scenes, and decide which ones seem to be related.

    Pick three to seven scenes. These scenes form a scene sequence.

3.  Add in some blank lines above the scene sequence and write a new, fresh paragraph that summarizes the gist of that scene sequence.

    Shoot for a paragraph of five to eight lines. Delete the original scene sequence, because you now have a single paragraph that summarizes those scenes.

  4.  Repeat Steps 2 and 3 until you’ve summarized and deleted all the original scenes.

  5.  Read through the whole synopsis and edit it down to two pages.

    Be disciplined. Be brutal if you must. Your agent or publisher will not love you if you turn in a 50-page synopsis.

Knowing how much detail you need

  Each paragraph in your synopsis summarizes a whole sequence of scenes in your novel. Your synopsis is high-level summary, and it can’t tell all the details of your story. It can’t tell all your amazing plot twists. It likely can’t even mention all your characters.
Your synopsis should focus on the three or four most important characters. Mentioning some of the minor characters in passing is okay, but stick to the story thread for your lead character. Explaining the theme of your story isn’t necessary. (See Chapter 11 for a discussion of your theme and how to find it.) You may not even know your theme yet when you write your synopsis. That’s okay.
The bottom line is this: If your synopsis has more than two single-spaced pages, then it has too much detail. Cut some out, and keep cutting until you’re down to two pages. This discipline will force you to think about which parts of your story are critical and which are just nice extras.
  The synopsis must stand alone. Assume that anyone reading the synopsis knows nothing about your book. When you introduce each new character, add a phrase or even a sentence to tell just a little about him. You don’t need much — just enough to make your synopsis comprehensible.

Example: A synopsis of Ender’s Game

Ender’s Game is a science fiction novel by Orson Scott Card. The novel won both the Hugo Award and the Nebula Award. (If you read only one science fiction novel in your life, make it Ender’s Game. You won’t be disappointed.)

We’ve chosen this novel as an example because it’s relatively simple to analyze. The novel’s lead character is Andrew “Ender” Wiggin, and he’s the POV character for the vast majority of scenes. The story unfolds linearly. The novel itself is very strong in four of the pillars of fiction that we identify in Chapter 2: story world, character, plot, and theme. 
Ender Wiggin is a boy chosen for rigorous military training in Battle School. Earth is expecting a fresh attack soon by an alien race of ant-like “buggers” who nearly destroyed humanity 80 years earlier. The buggers have superior technology and will certainly overwhelm Earth — unless a leader as talented as Alexander the Great can be found. Is Ender that leader? If so, can he be trained in time to save his people from annihilation? That’s the story question that Ender’s Game raises.
Because we want to avoid spoilers, we analyze only the first quarter of the book — Act 1 of the novel. Here is our synopsis of that first quarter, which summarizes 31 scenes:
An impending alien invasion is threatening earth in the near future, and military leaders around the planet are looking for a young leader with the brains and guts to save human civilization. After three years of being electronically monitored by the military authorities, 6-year-old Ender Wiggin finally has his electronic monitor removed. Everyone thinks that he’s been rejected as a candidate for military training, but the top brass have a real-life test lined up for him. 
When several bullies surround Ender after school to beat him up, he first tries to talk his way out of trouble, but then he launches a savage attack on the leader. To ensure that the bullies never bother him again, Ender brutalizes the downed boy and gives the others a terrifying warning.
Hopeful that Ender might be “the one,” the military takes him from his family and sends him with a number of other boys on the next launch to the orbiting Battle School. The officer in charge, Colonel Graff, praises Ender so lavishly that the other boys make him a pariah. Ender feels lonely and afraid, but he soon befriends one of the insiders, Alai, and helps him take over leadership of the launch group. Soon enough, Ender and Alai have welded a dysfunctional unit into a team.
Before Ender can relax, the trainers promote him into a mock army with much older boys. Ender’s new commander, Bonzo Madrid, rejects Ender as a useless paperweight and orders him to do nothing during the mock battles that his army fights. In his first few battles, Ender obeys Bonzo’s orders. In his fourth, Ender disobeys orders, fires on the enemy, and turns certain defeat into a draw. Humiliated, Bonzo retaliates by trading Ender away to another army and then beating him up. Resolving never to be a victim again, Ender registers for personal combat training.

Developing Your Scene List

A scene list helps you keep track of your scenes. To develop a scene list, you write a short summary of each scene. Managing all those summaries is challenging, but in this section, we show you two common techniques to make it easier.
Unlike with the synopsis (see the preceding section), you don’t have to develop a scene list to sell your book. If you don’t write a scene list, nobody will ever know or care. So why write one?
  Scenes are the fundamental unit of fiction. Therefore, making a list of your scenes gives you a powerful organizing tool for designing your story before you write it and for editing your novel after you write it. Which would you rather shuffle around: 100 lines summarizing your scenes or 400 pages of text?Back before computers were common, writers made scene lists by writing a sentence for each scene on a 3-x-5 index card. Then they could easily spread out their story on the living room floor and move things around until they got the scenes in the perfect order — which worked great until Rover chased Lassie through the pile, or until the writer wanted to try out an alternative arrangement without losing the original order. In either case, a stack of 3-x-5 cards was a hassle.
  We recommend replacing those 3-x-5 cards with a computer. You can organize all your scenes using a word processor or a text editor, but a spreadsheet works even better. Try programs such as Microsoft Excel; Numbers (part of the Apple iWork suite); the free OpenOffice suite (www.openoffice.org), which runs on all computer systems; or Google Spreadsheet (docs.google.com), which you can access via the Internet anywhere, anytime. If you’ve never used a spreadsheet, ask a spreadsheet-savvy friend to teach you how to do simple lists. You can pick up the essentials in a few minutes, and you’ll find it an extraordinary tool for managing your list of scenes.
You have two easy ways to fill in the details in your scene list, depending on whether you’re working top-down or bottom-up. Either you can start from your synopsis and flesh it out, or you can start with your manuscript and summarize it.

Top-down: Fleshing out your synopsis

If you’re a top-down thinker, then start with your synopsis, which is roughly a two-page summary of your story (see the earlier section “Writing the Synopsis”). Look at each paragraph in the synopsis and ask how you can break that down into scenes. Each scene will take place at a single location and at a single point in time. It will have a few characters, and it will move the plot forward.
For each scene that you imagine, add one line to your spreadsheet (or to a 3-x-5 card) describing the basics of what will happen in that scene. You don’t have to spell out all the details. Leave that fun for later. Right now, just get the big chunks right.
Try to break each paragraph of your synopsis into several distinct scenes. (Three to seven scenes is about right.) When you get to the end of the synopsis, your scene list is done. If you’re using a spreadsheet program, save it as a file.
  Feel free to try out different orders of scenes in your list. Editing your scene list in a spreadsheet is extremely easy. You can delete lines, add new lines, edit them, and move them around. Every time you make significant changes to your scene list, save it as a new file. (This is much easier than trying to make copies of 3-x-5 cards.)

Bottom-up: Summarizing your manuscript

If you’re a bottom-up thinker, making a scene list from your manuscript is simple. Read through the manuscript and summarize each scene in a single line of your spreadsheet (or on a 3-x-5 card). Remember that you don’t have to capture all the details. Your manuscript already has all those details anyway, so you won’t lose them.
Skimming through your manuscript and adding a line in your spreadsheet (or a card in your stack of 3-x-5 cards) for every scene in your manuscript takes only an hour or two. This may be the most valuable hour you ever spend on your entire novel. When you finish, you have a concise summary of your story that you can see all in one place.
If you’re truly a bottom-up thinker, you probably have a large amount of work to do to reorganize your story (especially if you’re a Seat-of-the-Pants writer). Your scene list is your power tool for helping you do that organization. Every line in your scene list represents hundreds of sentences in your first draft. Editing your scene list is far, far easier than shuffling scenes around in that big bad bulky manuscript. (See Chapter 13 for more comments on editing the high-level structure of your story.)

Example: A scene list of Ender’s Game

We continue using Ender’s Game as an example story. In the earlier section “Writing the Synopsis,” we show an example synopsis of the first quarter of the novel. Here is the corresponding scene list, which we created by reading each scene in the first several chapters of the novel and writing a sentence or three about each one. Note that our scene list has considerably more detail than our synopsis.

  ✓ Two military officers discuss Ender Wiggin. He looks like a good candi-date for Battle School, but is he too malleable? They decide to surround him with enemies and see how he does before making a final decision.

  ✓ The doctor removes Ender’s monitor, a traumatic procedure that nearly kills him.

  ✓ Ender returns to his normal classroom, where the other children see that he’s had his monitor removed. A pack of bullies attacks Ender after school. He defends himself by brutally attacking the leader of the gang.

  ✓ The officers wonder if Ender defended himself so savagely for the “right reasons.” They agree to watch how Ender handles his cruel brother Peter.

  ✓ Peter bullies Ender and threatens to kill him, but his sister Valentine talks Peter out of it.

  ✓ The officers discuss how to get Ender to leave home and decide that dishonesty is the best policy, although they will tell him the truth if  necessary.

  ✓ Colonel Graff visits Ender, questions him about his motives in the attack on the bullies, and then offers him a chance to go to Battle School.

  ✓ Ender is reluctant to accept the offer but finally realizes that he really has little choice and agrees to go to Battle School with the next launch group.

  ✓ The officers worry that Ender will fit in too well with the other boys, harming his military creativity, so they decide to isolate him psychologically from his peers.

  ✓ Lavishly praised by Colonel Graff during the launch, Ender is bullied by one of the other boys, Bernard. Ender defends himself and accidentally breaks Bernard’s arm.

  ✓ Ender confronts Colonel Graff for inciting Bernard to bully him. Graff responds brusquely, and Ender realizes that he can’t count on Graff ever to help him.

✓ The officers worry that they’ll ruin Ender and decide that he will be allowed to have friends but he must never have a parent figure.

  ✓ Ender settles into his room and gets oriented to Battle School, but he is already a pariah within his peer group of fellow “launchies.”

  ✓ Ender feels lonely and afraid, but he resolves to be strong and show no fear.

  ✓ Ender goes to the game room, plays an older boy in a difficult war game, and wins two out of three. The older boys sneer at him because he’s so young.

  ✓ Ender uses his computer system to undermine Bernard, the bully of his launch group. He succeeds and gains a few friends, but Bernard is now his confirmed enemy.

  ✓ The officers are worried that Ender is poisoning his launch group by causing division. They decide to do nothing, forcing Ender to weld his peers together through his own efforts.

  ✓ Ender befriends Alai, Bernard’s best friend. Soon, Alai is the leader of the entire launch group, and there are no longer any outsiders.

  ✓ Ender plays a video game and finds a way to beat the unbeatable Giant — by doing the unthinkable.

  ✓ The officers are shocked at the way Ender has found to beat the Giant and decide to let him rest for a short time before his next ordeal.

  ✓ Ender agrees to help Alai build a new security system but then discovers he has been promoted to one of the “armies” — at a far earlier age than anyone has ever been promoted before.

  ✓ Ender goes to the game room and plays until the game shuts down and the computer orders him to report to his new “Salamander Army.”

  ✓ Ender reports to Salamander Army for duty and is completely rejected by his commander, Bonzo Madrid. He is befriended by outcast Petra, the only girl in the unit.
  ✓ Ender goes to the bathroom and is recognized by boys in another army, who remember his exploits in the game room. He realizes that at least a few of the older boys know who he is, and he resolves that soon everybody will know him.

  ✓ Ender gets some training from Petra, but Bonzo refuses to let him practice with the rest of the army.

  ✓ Lacking training partners in his own army, Ender begins training the young boys from his launch group. His commander Bonzo orders him to stop doing so.

✓ Ender persuades Bonzo to let him train the launchies in order to make himself valuable enough that Bonzo can trade him away to another army.

  ✓ Ender participates in his first mock battle under Bonzo’s strict orders to do nothing. His army loses and at the end, he is the only soldier not totally “disabled.” After the battle, everyone realizes that Ender could have forced a draw if he had disobeyed orders and fired his weapon.

  ✓ Ender takes part in another mock battle. His side is losing, and so Ender violates his orders by shooting several of the enemy soldiers. This turns certain defeat into a draw, but his commander Bonzo is furious with him.

  ✓ Bonzo trades Ender to Rat army, then beats him up for disobeying orders.

  ✓ Unwilling to be beaten up ever again, Ender registers for a course in per-sonal combat.

Extending your scene list

If you use a spreadsheet to manage your scene list, you’ll find that you can extend it in many ways. You can add a column to track the POV character for each scene. (See Chapter 7 for an explanation of POV characters.) You can add a column to track the date and time of each scene, which is great if you have a complex timeline for your story. You can add a column to estimate the number of pages for each scene. Since spreadsheets make it easy to add a column of numbers, you can even make a projection of how long your novel will be. Spreadsheets also make it easy to color-code rows or columns, so if you want to assign a different color to each POV character, you can do that easily. If you rearrange the scenes in your spreadsheet, those extra columns won’t get scrambled, because spreadsheet software makes it easy for you to move rows as single units. (Again, ask a tech-savvy friend if you need help on this.)

Setting Up the Structure  of Individual Scenes

The scene is the fundamental unit of fiction. Therefore, you must master the art of writing scenes. Each scene is a mini-story, with a beginning, middle, and end of its own. At the end of each scene, at least one of the characters must have gone through some sort of change. Otherwise, the scene isn’t pulling its weight. Modern fiction has two different kinds of scenes, each with a simple structure. In this section, we show you both structures and explain how they work together to give your reader a powerful emotional experience.  A scene takes place in a single location at a single point in time. It has a beginning, a middle, and an end, and its purpose is to give the reader a powerful emotional experience by showing the scene while focusing on one special character — the focal character. You want your reader to identify emotionally with that focal character. 
In most cases, the focal character is identical to the POV character. If you use an omniscient or multiple point of view, the scene has more than one POV character, but the dominant one is your focal character. If you use a third-person objective point of view, then you don’t have any POV character, but your scene still has a focal character. (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of point-of-view, focal characters, and POV characters.) Fiction is infinitely diverse. Anything can happen. And yet the structure of scenes in most modern fiction is exceptionally simple. That’s because scenes are quite short. You can classify each scene based on what happens in its beginning, middle, and end.
  A modern novel normally has several dozen scenes. Many novels have more than a hundred. Each scene can range in length from a few paragraphs to a dozen pages or more. As we note at the beginning of this section, modern fiction has only two basic kinds of scenes:

  ✓ Proactive scene: This type of scene includes a goal, a conflict, and a setback.

  ✓ Reactive scene: This type of scene includes a reaction, a dilemma, and a decision.

In the following sections, we look at each of these scene types in detail.

Setting the proactive scene

The most common type of scene follows a precise sequence. We call it a proactive scene because it’s easier than calling it a goal-conflict-setback scene. In your novel, probably the majority of your scenes will be proactive scenes. A typical proactive scene looks like this:

1.  Goal: At the beginning of the scene, the POV character has some goal that he hopes to achieve by the end of the scene.

  2.  Conflict: During the middle of the scene, the POV character tries repeatedly to achieve his goal, but he runs into obstacle after obstacle as the scene unfolds.

  3.  Setback: At the end of the scene, the POV character hits a nasty  setback.

    Normally, he fails to reach his goal and is now worse off than he was before. Occasionally, he achieves what he wanted, but something bad happens to nullify this minor victory.
Here’s a summary of an example proactive scene:
So far, the writing conference has cost you $400, a six-hour flight, and a lot of apologizing for missing your son’s rugby tournament, but it’s worth it. You have a meeting with an agent, and you’re sure she’s the one who’ll take you over that last hurdle to publication.You sit down at the table, ready to start the nice-weather-we’re-having routine. Right off the bat, she begins grilling you on your story — plot, characters, and the ontological implications of time travel. You stumble through your answers. As her eyes get colder, you begin stuttering. When you reach a frazzled state of incoherent mumbling, she asks to read your chapter. As her finger moves down the page, her face tightens into a hard scowl. “Sorry,” she says. “This scene has no structure at all. I wouldn’t touch this project with a sixty-foot pole.”Here, the goal is to interest the editor in your novel, the conflict arises when she asks you a long series of tough questions, and the setback occurs when she rejects your work and humiliates you.

What is your scene’s goal?

You should try to establish two things very early in each proactive scene:

  ✓ Who is the primary POV character?

  ✓ What is his or her goal for this scene?

  The goal for each proactive scene should be

  ✓ Simple: You want the goal to be simple to understand because a scene is simple — it’s one small piece of your story.

  ✓ Objective: A goal should be objective so your reader can easily visualize what success looks like.

✓ Worthwhile: Otherwise, why would you be wasting ink on it?

  ✓ Achievable: A goal that can’t be achieved within the scene kills the tension for that scene.

  ✓ Difficult: A trivially easy goal won’t keep your reader up late flipping the pages.

Conflict is key

  Most of your scene should be conflict. We recommend that a proactive scene be about 80 to 90 percent conflict. That’s a lot. If you establish your goal early, then you can spend almost the entire scene throwing one obstacle after another at your POV character. Your character will dodge those obstacles and will keep trying to reach his goal. Don’t let him give up early. Make him sweat. The harder you work him, the more your reader will invest in him emotionally. You can and must be cruel to your POV character; your readers will love you for it. In Chapter 10, we discuss techniques for showing this conflict in exqui-site detail.

Hitting the setback

We recommend that you hit your POV character with a setback as late in the proactive scene as possible. It’s quite possible to let the hammer fall in the closing paragraph, the last sentence, even the final word. Here are some ideas to keep in mind with your setback:

  ✓ It should be an objective failure to reach the goal of the scene. (When the editor says no, that’s pretty objective. You can hear it.)

  ✓ It should be a result of the POV character’s persistence in trying to achieve his goal.

  ✓ It should leave the POV character worse off than he was at the start of the scene.

  ✓ It should be unexpected, if possible, but it should also follow logically from the way the scene plays out.

Following up with the reactive scene

The reactive scene usually follows immediately after a proactive scene and looks like this:

  1.  Reaction: At the beginning of the reactive scene, the POV character is reeling from the setback in the previous scene.
    She spends some time reacting emotionally and finally gets control of her feelings.

2.  Dilemma: During the middle of the reactive scene, the POV character has to figure out what to do next.
    If her setback was significant enough, then she has no good options. She has a dilemma, and she must think hard to choose from the least-bad option.

  3.  Decision: Eventually, the POV character makes a decision.
    That provides her with a goal for her next scene, which is normally a proactive scene. 

Here’s a summary of an example reactive scene:
For a second, you can’t breathe. In your worst nightmare, this isn’t what you expected. You stumble away in a fog, hoping desperately that you don’t break down before you can find a place to be alone. You stagger outside into the blinding sun and find a safe, quiet spot under an ancient oak tree. After a few minutes, the mental haze starts to lift. You wipe your eyes and take a few deep breaths. You release your manuscript from your clammy death-grip. Okay, fine. You struck out. What now? You could go back and argue with her, but that’s probably going to make things worse. You could quit writing, but . . . writing is your life. You could try to figure out what she meant by “scene structure” but honestly, you thought you knew that already. What the heck are you going to do? A friend walks by, sees your teary face, and asks if you’re okay. You explain what’s happened. Your friend suggests that you take your manuscript over to the walk-in critique table and have a professional writer give you some constructive suggestions. “You’re crazy,” you say. “How much more is that going to cost me?” Your friend pulls you to your feet and picks up your manuscript. “Didn’t you pay attention in orientation? It’s free. They said it’s the most overlooked part of the conference. But you’d better hurry, because they close in ten minutes.” You feel a grin sliding onto your face. “I’m on my way.”
In the example, the reaction to the rejection is visceral — you can’t breathe. You stagger away. Your mind is in a fog. In your dilemma, you consider several options: arguing with the editor, quitting writing, and trying to figure things out on your own — all bad options. Your friend suggests a fourth option — getting some help at the walk-in critique table. That’s an easy decision to make, once you learn that it’s an option.

Going for the reaction

The reaction part of a reactive scene can be either long or short, depending on how big of a setback your character is responding to and on how emotional the character is. The reaction is mainly emotion. If your novel is an introspective one, then you can deliver many of your powerful emotional experiences right here in the reaction. If your novel is more geared to action, then you probably want to keep the reaction short and swift.
  The reaction part of your reactive scene is raw emotion. It will last only as long as your POV character has emotions to spend on it. Eventually, your character will calm down and begin to think more rationally. That’s when your reaction ends and you need to move on.

What is the dilemma?

  The dilemma is not emotional; it’s intellectual. Your POV character has a problem. How is she going to solve it? She has options, but all those options are bad options. If she has any good options, then you haven’t given her a strong enough setback in the previous scene.
Your character will mull the options at some length. How long? That depends on how terrible the situation is and how good your character is at analyzing facts and making decisions. The dilemma may take a long time to sort through, or your character may zip through it quickly.

Deciding on the decision

At some point, your POV character has to decide. She can’t dither forever. When she makes a decision, she needs to commit to it. A decision should have all these features:

  ✓ Simple: Your character needs clarity of vision with her decision.

  ✓ Objective: Your reader needs to be able to visualize exactly what your character wants next.

  ✓ Worthwhile: Your reader must believe the character would actually make this decision, based on her values.

  ✓ Achievable: Your reader must believe that success really may be just a chapter away.

  ✓ Difficult: Your reader must have some doubts that this decision will work. 

At 3:00 a.m., your reader needs a reason to turn over the page instead of turning out the lights. A decision that’s simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult gives your reader that reason.
Notice that this decision sounds an awful lot like the goal of a proactive scene. That’s exactly what a decision is — a choice to pursue a new goal.

Coming full circle with your scenes

A proactive scene starts a character out with a goal, hits him with loads of conflict, and then rocks him back with a setback. A reactive scene picks up immediately afterward, taking that character through an emotional reaction, then working him through an intellectual dilemma, and finally taking him to a decision — to pursue a new goal.
In theory, therefore, you can write a proactive scene and follow it up with a reactive scene and follow that with a new proactive scene, alternating for-ever. That’s a fine theory, and it works often in practice but not always. Here are a couple of reasons you may not follow this strict alternation of proactive and reactive scenes in your fiction:

  ✓ To pick up the pace of your story: Modern commercial fiction often blazes through the story at a gallop. In fast-action fiction, the proactive scenes run long, and the author may fly through the reactive scene in a paragraph of narrative summary. The author may even skip the reactive scene, leaving it to the reader to figure out what reaction, dilemma, and decision the POV character worked through.

  ✓ To switch POV characters after a scene: If you do that, you probably can’t show your POV character’s emotive reaction from the setback in the previous scene. So when do you show it? Maybe later, when you switch back to that POV character for a new scene. Or maybe never, if the POV character can explain her reaction, dilemma, and decision to some other character.
  Whether you show your reactive scene to the reader or not, you need to know what happens in it. That tells you what goal your character will have further down the road. Also, a lot depends on your genre, reader expectations, and your skill as an author. The modern trend is to cut reactive scenes to the bone.

Scene structure in Gone With the Wind

Consider this example early in the novel Gone With the Wind, by Margaret Mitchell. Scarlett O’Hara is infatuated with Ashley Wilkes and expects to induce him to marry her someday. When she discovers that Ashley has gotten engaged to Melanie Hamilton, Scarlett can hardly believe it and vows to speak to him at the next day’s barbecue and ball at the Wilkes plantation. During the afternoon lull, when the other young women are napping, Scarlett steals away to confront Ashley in the infamous library scene. Here’s an analy-sis of this proactive scene:

✓ Goal: Scarlett plans to meet Ashley, confess her love to him, and persuade him to marry her instead of Melanie.

  ✓ Conflict: Ashley explains repeatedly that what Scarlett wants is impossible. They’re too different. Yes, he cares for her, but he needs to marry a woman with a personality like his. Scarlett is furious as she sees her dream vanishing and tells him she hates him and slaps him hard. He leaves her, and she’s so furious, she throws a fine china bowl across  the room.

  ✓ Setback: Rhett Butler — a dishonorable scoundrel, has been napping on the couch and has heard every word. Rhett laughs at her, and Scarlett is humiliated. A reactive scene follows directly after the proactive scene:

  ✓ Reaction: Scarlett is lightheaded with fury. She can hardly catch her breath and fears she may faint. She’s terrified that word of her meeting with Ashley might get out. Nobody can know.

  ✓ Dilemma: Should Scarlett join the napping girls? Impossible — she overhears them talking about her. Honey Wilkes is accusing Scarlett of being “fast.” Should she leave? Impossible — Melanie is defending Scarlett, which is too hideous for words. Worse, Honey has somehow caught on that Scarlett loves Ashley. Should Scarlett go home? Impossible — that would leave the field open to Honey’s poison gossip, and people might believe it. Scarlett can’t continue listening, so she hurries downstairs and runs into Charles, who is Melanie’s brother and Honey’s beau. Charles sees that Scarlett is disturbed and takes her aside. Earlier in the day, Charles had become infatuated with her and even worked up the courage to ask her to marry him. Now, with news of war freshly arrived, Charles is planning to fight the Yankees. He asks if Scarlett will wait  for him.

  ✓ Decision: Scarlett sees that if she marries Charles, it will solve all her problems. It will show Ashley that she was only flirting with him and wasn’t serious. It will kill Melanie to have Scarlett as a sister-in-law. It will destroy Honey’s plans to marry Charles. Scarlett decides to accept Charles’s proposal on the spot.

Scene structure in Patriot Games

Now look at a much faster-paced example from a thriller, Patriot Games, written by Tom Clancy. The lead character is Jack Ryan, a history professor at the Naval Academy in Annapolis.

Chapter one begins with Ryan on a research trip in London. After a day in the library, he has just met up with his wife and daughter in Hyde Park, when they hear an explosion only 50 feet away. Ryan turns and sees two gunman shooting up both sides of a disabled Rolls Royce with automatic weapons. Here’s an analysis of the proactive scene and the reactive scene that follows:

  ✓ Goal: Ryan instantly decides to stop this attack — with his own body.

  ✓ Conflict: Ryan charges the gunman on the near side of the car and blindsides him with a flying tackle that snaps bones. Ryan snatches the gunman’s pistol, knowing that he still needs to take out the man on the other side, who has an AK-47. But what about the man he’s just tackled? Is he conscious? There’s no time to find out, so Ryan pumps a bullet into the man’s hip to disable him. He locates the other gunman, who has now discarded his AK-47 for a pistol. The gunman sees Jack. Both men fire. Jack feels a fiery impact in his left shoulder, but his own bullet hits the terrorist in the chest. Jack squeezes off another shot that hits the killer in the face, killing him instantly.

  ✓ Setback: Ryan himself is shot — quite badly.

  ✓ Reaction: Ryan feels dizzy, breathless, gasping for air.

✓ Dilemma: One of the palace guards is racing toward Ryan with a gun. The man can’t possibly know that Ryan is a good guy. Jack is holding a gun at the scene of a terrorist attack. What should he do?

  ✓ Decision: Ryan spends no time agonizing over this dilemma. He takes the clip out of his pistol, drops it on the ground, sets the gun down, too, and steps away from them. He’ll just have to trust that the guardsman won’t shoot him.

MARGINALIA:

Recommended reading

Here are some books we recommend for further reading on these middle layers of story structure:

 ✓  Story,  by  Robert  McKee:  McKee  is  a famous teacher of screenwriting, and his book Story is a classic. (He and his book play a role in the movie Adaptation, starring Nicolas Cage.) This is an advanced book, which we recommend here mainly because of  McKee’s  discussion  of  sequences  of scenes.  Although  McKee  doesn’t  say explicitly that each paragraph of your synopsis  should  summarize  a  sequence  of scenes, we got this idea after reading his work. We believe he has highlighted this particular  level  of  story  structure  better than anyone else has.

 ✓  Techniques  of  the  Selling  Writer,  by Dwight Swain: Swain was a published fic-tion writer and a long-time teacher of fiction at the University of Oklahoma. He is best known for his analysis of scenes and sequels. Because both of these are actually scenes in the usual sense, we’ve taken the liberty of relabeling these. Swain’s scene is identical to our proactive scene, and his sequel is identical to our reactive scene.

 ✓  Plot & Structure, by James Scott Bell: Bell is a best-selling novelist and former fiction columnist for Writer’s Digest. His book is the best and simplest work we know on story structure.

}
{

Chapter 10

Action, Dialogue, and More: The Lowest Layer of Your Plot

In This Chapter

Writing action

Portraying dialogue, thoughts, and emotion

Using description

Reliving the past with flashbacks

Fast-forwarding with narrative summary

Putting it all together

The modern novel has six layers of complexity in its plot. Chapter 8 explains the first two layers, storyline and three-act structure. Chapter 9 covers the middle three layers, synopsis, scene list, and scene. In this chap-ter, we discuss the lowest layer of plot, in which your story unfolds para-graph by paragraph.
Your goal as a novelist is to give your reader a powerful emotional experience. Most of the techniques for doing that require you to plug your reader directly into the senses of your point-of-view (POV) character. When an editor asks you to “show, don’t tell” your story, this is what she’s asking you to do.You have five primary tools for showing your story: action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description. You can use action and dialogue for any character in any scene. You can use interior emotion and interior monologue only for your POV characters. Normally, you can use description only for your non-POV characters, with a few important exceptions. You also have two other tools for your story — flashback and narrative summary. Each of these has a place if you handle them right.To become a successful fiction writer, you need to understand the art of combining all these tools together to give your reader the illusion of actually being one of the characters in your story. In this chapter, we describe the tools and explain how they work together.

Using Seven Core Tools for  Showing and Telling

Have you ever had an agent or editor scrawl, “show, don’t tell,” on your manuscript and return it to you without further explanation? Isn’t that infuriating? Of course it is, for the simple reason that the editor has told you to “show, don’t tell,” but she has not shown you how to “show, don’t tell.” Editors never explain what “show, don’t tell” means because they assume you already know it.
  Showing means presenting the story to the reader using sensory information. The reader wants to see the story, hear it, smell it, feel it, and taste it, all the while experiencing the thoughts and feelings of a living, breathing character. Telling means summarizing the story for the reader in a way that skips past the sensory information and goes straight to the facts.
You have five main tools that you can use for showing your story. In order of their importance to you, these are

  ✓ Action 

  ✓ Dialogue

  ✓ Interior emotion

  ✓ Interior monologue

  ✓ Description

You can mix these as you like within a paragraph, so long as it makes sense to do so. You can even mix them within a sentence. But you don’t have to mix them. If you like, you can have an entire paragraph or more that uses just one of these tools. 
Please note that the previously-mentioned tools can also be used in narrative summary to tell your story. Since we are most interested in how to use these to show your story, we need to sharpen our definitions of action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description so that they refer specifically to showing, not telling. See the following sections for exact definitions of what we mean by all of these terms, along with examples of how to use them. You also have two other tools at your disposal:

  ✓ Flashback: In a flashback, you transition back in time to an earlier scene where you show part of the story using all the usual suspects — action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description — and then you transition back to the current time. You must provide the reader with some sort of cue to signal both the beginning and end of  the flashback.

✓ Narrative summary: Narrative summary is what editors call telling. Narrative summary is a concise and efficient way to pass lots of information to the reader. It bypasses your reader’s sensory organs and goes straight to the cognitive center of his mind.
In this section, we analyze these seven tools and show you how to put them together effectively at the lowest layer of plot complexity — to show and tell your story like a professional fiction writer.

Action

Action is stuff happening right now, instant by instant. Action never summarizes; action shows. Beginning writers often imagine that action is about big stuff happening fast — car chases, gun battles, and exploding helicopters. Although those can occasionally be important parts of the action in a scene, they’re rarely the most important thing to your reader. Action is normally the ordinary, everyday movements and gestures that your characters make. A man kissing his wife, a girl petting her dog, a leaf falling from a tree — all of these are actions, and any of them may carry emotive freight with your character (and therefore with your reader).
  Action matters only if it involves characters the reader cares about. An exploding helicopter with nobody in it means nothing. An exploding helicopter with your 3-year-old daughter in it means everything. Never show an action that doesn’t mean anything to one of your characters.
Look at the following two action paragraphs. The scene doesn’t involve much movement, but each action expresses something:
Your editor smiles at you when she sees you approaching her appointment table. She’s talking on her cellphone, but she gestures to the seat across the table, points to her watch, and holds up her index finger. One minute.
You collapse in the chair, glad to have a little extra time to prepare while she wraps up her call. You reach into your leather portfolio and pull out your latest synopsis and sample chapters, the sequel to the novel that this editor bought from you last year.
Notice that the two paragraphs are fundamentally different. The first focuses on the editor, whom readers view from the outside, because she’s not a POV character. Readers can’t read her mind, yet they can know a great deal about her thoughts and emotions by her actions and facial expressions — her non-verbal communication. The second paragraph focuses on the POV character, and there we see not only actions but also some thoughts and feelings.

Look at all you can figure out about your editor from a few sentences about her gestures:

  ✓ She smiles, telling you she’s happy to see you.

  ✓ She’s talking on her cellphone, telling you she’s a busy woman.

  ✓ She gestures to the seat across the table, welcoming you and reinforcing the message that she’s glad to see you.

  ✓ She points to her watch, indicating she’s aware of the time and she’s conscious she’s encroaching on your appointment time.

  ✓ She holds up one finger. In context, this can only mean that she wants you to wait one minute. The text makes this explicit by adding the sentence One minute in italics. 

All of these combine to give you a simple message. The editor is happy to see you but she’s busy. You’d better deliver a good writing sample, or she may not be so happy 15 minutes from now. The actions of the POV character also tell a nonverbal story — the way you collapse into the chair says that you’re tired, but the fact that you reach into your portfolio shows that you’re prepared. When showing the actions of the POV character, it’s common to add in thoughts or feelings to get the reader more fully inside the skin of the character. The example passage notes your thought that you appreciate having extra time to prepare. For tips on mixing in this kind of information, see the later sections titled “Interior emotion” and “Interior monologue.”
  In fiction, as in real life, actions speak louder than words. If a character’s actions send a different message than her dialogue does, the reader will always believe the actions.
See Dr. Margie Lawson’s online course, Empowering Characters’ Emotions (www.margielawson.com), for more information on using actions for non-verbal communication. 
Many novels do an excellent job of showing actions. Some examples are: The Maltese Falcon, by Dashiell Hammett; The Spy Who Came in From the Cold, by John le Carré; Dies the Fire, by S. M. Stirling; and River God, by Wilbur Smith. 

Dialogue

Dialogue refers to words spoken aloud by your characters. Even if only one character is present, if he speaks aloud, that qualifies as dialogue. Writers distinguish between direct dialogue (quoting the exact words of the character), indirect dialogue (giving the gist of the words of the character), and summary dialogue (giving a summary of an entire conversation in narrative summary). When we use the term “dialogue,” we mean either direct dialogue or indirect dialogue, the two forms of dialogue that qualify as showing. Summary dialogue is telling. Here are some rules on showing dialogue:

  ✓ Show direct dialogue word-for-word in quotation marks. Don’t summarize what the speaker says. Show it, word-for-word: 
   “Tell me truly, and don’t lie to me, Ashley Wilkes!” Scarlett said. “Do you think I’m beautiful?”

  ✓ Show indirect dialogue nearly word-for-word, without quotation marks. Here, you can summarize a little, but you still need to attribute the dialogue to a character: 
   Scarlett asked if Ashley thought she was beautiful.

  ✓ Use a tag to tell who’s speaking. You can use a simple “he said,” as a tag or you can use an action tag that names a character and shows him doing something. If it’s obvious who the speaker is, you can eliminate the tag altogether, but never leave the reader in doubt about who’s speaking (and try not to have characters say each other’s names too much).
   Avoid using fancy tags, such as “he explained,” or “she expostulated.” A simple one like “he said” or “she asked” is nearly invisible and therefore best. Also avoid adverbs in your tags, such as, “he said patronizingly,” or, “she said sarcastically.” If he’s really patronizing or she’s really sarcastic, the words themselves will show it.

  ✓ Put the dialogue for each character in a separate paragraph. Show the tag in the same paragraph as the dialogue, even if it’s an action tag.
Look at another three paragraphs in our continuing scene, each showing dialogue spoken by a different character:
Your editor closes her phone. “So! What have you got for me today?” She leans forward, reaching for your manuscript.
You push the stack across the table. “It’s another paranormal suspense novel. Our hero, the bus driver, is kidnapped by North Korean agents who try to force him to reveal the date of the coming attack by the American imperialists.”
“Plagiarist!” screams a voice behind you. “You ripped off my idea!”
Opposing sides: Remember that dialogue is war!
  Dialogue is war! Every dialogue should be a controlled conflict between at least two characters with opposing agendas. The main purpose of dialogue is to advance the conflict of the story.

You can’t have a war unless the opposing sides actually oppose each other. In the first two paragraphs of our example dialogue, the editor and you have identical goals — to discuss your manuscript. The reader is looking for conflict here, finding none, and wondering when it will kick in. Only when the third character shows up do we have conflict. That character has a completely different agenda than you or your editor does. The new character wants to bash heads — yours, in fact. Now we have conflict.In our example, we’ve made the conflict overt. But conflict can be hidden under a surface politeness, as long as the different characters have different goals. (See Chapter 9 for a discussion of the importance of a goal in a proactive scene.) For example, in a famous scene near the end of Pride and Prejudice, Lady Catherine de Bourgh arrives at the home of Lizzie Bennet. Lady Catherine’s goal is to make Lizzie deny that she intends to wed the Lady’s nephew, Mr. Darcy. Lizzie has little hope of ever marrying Darcy, but she hates the old woman and refuses to make any such promise. Her goal is to preserve her own dignity. The dialogue between the two is fierce — and yet icily polite, with Lizzie consistently turning de Bourgh’s logic back against her. The conflict comes from the sharply differing goals.

Keeping your dialogue off balance

  When the reader knows what the characters are going to say next, there can be little conflict. But when the characters surprise each other (and the reader), then the plot begins sparking.
In our example, the dialogue looks nicely balanced, even tame, until the third character enters from nowhere. You have several ways to throw a dialogue off balance. You can introduce

  ✓ New characters

  ✓ New facts

  ✓ New events

One of your characters may have a conflict between his own values, forcing him to make a hard, unpredictable choice. (See Chapter 7 on the importance of conflicting values in a character.) Any of these will throw the dialogue off balance and keep your reader guessing.

Giving each character a voice

  Voice is the particular way that a character puts together words to express rational speech and rational thought. Huck Finn has a strong and distinctive voice; so does Scarlett O’Hara; so does Albus Dumbledore. Nobody could possibly confuse Huck with Scarlett or Dumbledore. In fiction, a character’s voice is important in establishing reader identification and revealing character. Your main tools for showing voice are dialogue and interior monologue, which we discuss later in this chapter. (For more on voice, flip to Chapter 12.)

Numerous novels have wonderful dialogue. A few examples are Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen; The Chosen, by Chaim Potok; and Ender’s Game, by Orson Scott Card.
See Self-Editing for Fiction Writers, by Renni Browne and Dave King (Harper), for more information on dialogue. See Stein on Writing, by Sol Stein (St. Martin’s Griffin), for some insights into creating overt conflict in dialogue by giving characters different scripts. See Getting Into Character by Brandilyn Collins (Wiley), for a clear presentation of writing subtle conflict into dialogue using subtexting.

Interior emotion

Interior emotion refers to the internal physiological sensations you feel in the grip of strong emotions. It’s common in fiction to tell a character’s emotions. For example, you can tell the reader that Frodo is afraid. That is not interior emotion, it’s narrative summary. If you want to show his fear, then you need to make the reader feel Frodo’s pulse ramping up, his hands turning clammy and cold, and the back of his neck prickling with a thousand tiny needles. That is interior emotion — when the physical sensations show the fear.You use interior emotion only for a POV character. That’s what a POV character is — a character whose skin you can get inside. Your reader reads in order to have a powerful emotional experience. By showing interior emotion, you have a terrific opportunity to deliver the very drug your reader craves — emotion. The next paragraph shows an example of interior emotion, followed by interior monologue (which we cover in the next section), followed by action, all focusing on the POV character in the scene. The interior emotion is in the first sentence of the paragraph.
A hot ball of adrenaline wells up in your belly. That voice. You know that voice. But from where? You spin around to look.
  Showing your reader an emotion is far stronger than telling your reader that emotion. You tell the emotion by naming it. You show the emotion by showing the character’s physiological reactions at moments of high tension. Keep asking yourself, “How does my character feel? What does my character feel?” If you can answer those questions with a physiological response, then you have a potent way to give your reader a powerful emotional experience.
We strongly commend Dr. Margie Lawson’s online course, Empowering Character Emotions (www.margielawson.com), for an encyclopedic study of how to show character emotions through physiological responses. Here’s a short list of guidelines to get you started:

  ✓ Show interior emotion only for the POV character. If you’re writing in objective third person, then you have no POV character and therefore you have chosen not to use interior emotion. If you’re writing in omniscient or head-hopping POV, then you can show interior emotion for more than one character in a given scene. Weigh the advantages of this against the disadvantage of your reader losing identification with the lead character in the scene.

  ✓ Focus on involuntary physiological responses. What happens in your character’s hands, feet, belly, neck, face? What metaphor can you use to recreate this sensation?

  ✓ Don’t name the emotion, which tells the reader the emotion. Instead, show it.

  ✓ Less is more. Don’t overuse the method. Use it when you need a moment of sharp and vivid emotion.

You may think that our term interior emotion is redundant. Isn’t emotion always interior? Yes, of course it is, but you don’t always get inside your character to show emotion. Quite often you merely tell about your character’s emotions, using narrative summary. We use the term interior emotion to refer only to those occasions when you get directly inside your character to show the internal physical responses to those emotions.
  Emotion often leaves visible exterior traces, in body language and facial expressions. Therefore, you have ways to show the emotions of the other characters in your scene — through the character’s actions and through a description of the character, especially her facial expression.
Virtually all novels use interior emotion to show the feelings of the characters. Some of our favorites include: The entire Harry Potter series, by J. K. Rowling; No Second Chance, by Harlan Coben; and The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follett.

Interior monologue

Interior monologue means the actual thoughts your character is thinking. Just as with dialogue, writers distinguish between direct interior monologue (telling the exact words of the thought), indirect interior monologue (giving the gist of the thought), and summary interior monologue. When we use the term “interior monologue,” we mean either direct or indirect interior monologue, both of which are showing. Summary interior monologue is telling.

Not only do thoughts convey information, but they also give readers insight into character. They’re one of two tools you have to show your character’s voice, which is how that character puts words together. The other tool is dialogue. (For information on character voice, see Chapter 12 and the earlier “Dialogue” section.)
As with interior emotion, you use interior monologue only for a POV character, never for a non-POV character. Look at the middle three sentences in this example paragraph, all of which are interior monologue.
A hot ball of adrenaline wells up in your belly. That voice. You know that voice. But from where? You spin around to look.We highly recommend the chapter titled “Interior Monologue” in Self-Editing for Fiction Writers, by Renni Browne and Dave King (Harper).
  Here are some guidelines for writing interior monologue:

  ✓ Show interior monologue only for the POV character. If you’re writing in objective third-person POV, then you have no POV character. If you’re writing in omniscient or head-hopping POV, then you have several.

  ✓ For direct interior monologue, use present tense if the thoughts are about the present, even if you’re telling your story in past tense. Example: “Jack studied the tiger through his binoculars. I hate that beast.”

  ✓ Use italics only for direct interior monologue, not for indirect. Many writers these days don’t use italics at all, not even for direct interior monologue. You have some freedom to choose your style, but be consistent.

  ✓ You never need to add the words “he thought” in interior monologue. The reader is smart enough to know that the POV character is thinking your interior monologue. 

  ✓ For indirect interior monologue, use past tense if you’re telling your story in past tense. Example: “Jack studied the tiger through his binoculars. He hated the beast that had killed his daughter.”

  ✓ Use indirect interior monologue when you want to insert a small amount of explanatory material. In the preceding example, we add an explanation of why Jack hates the tiger — because it killed his daughter. Real people don’t explain their reasons to themselves, so this kind of explanation wouldn’t be appropriate as direct interior monologue.

  ✓ Don’t lie to your reader using interior monologue. Your characters must tell themselves the truth — so far as they know it. Your reader will be furious if you deceive her using interior monologue. However, your reader won’t mind if it’s obvious that the character is fooling herself.

Some novels that use interior monologue very effectively are: The Speed of Dark, by Elizabeth Moon; The Time Traveler’s Wife, by Audrey Niffenegger; and Rich Man, Poor Man, by Irwin Shaw.

Description

Description creates a word picture in the reader’s mind, much like an image in a movie. Look at the following paragraph, a description of a new character who’s about to attack the POV character:
Long, greasy black hair. A scar down his left cheek disappearing into a scruffy sideburn, speckled gray. He’s wearing black leather and stainless steel chains. Dangling from his right hand is a pair of those wooden-stick martial-arts things — nunchakus? His pupils are dilated to the size of quarters, and a stream of tobacco juice dribbles through the stubble on his chin.
  Here are some guidelines on writing description:

  ✓ Show only what the POV character can see, hear, smell, taste, or touch. Normally, this means that you aren’t able to show a description of the POV character unless he’s looking in the mirror. However, if you’re using third-person objective, omniscient, or head-hopping POVs, then you have the freedom to show a description of any character. 

  ✓ Use strong nouns and verbs. If you’re tempted to use adjectives, ask whether a stronger noun will serve you better. If you feel the need for an adverb, ask whether a sharper verb is called for.

  ✓ Pinpoint concrete details that imply the many details you aren’t showing.

  ✓ Filter the description through the mind and emotions of the POV charac-ter (if you have one) so his voice comes through.

  ✓ Use description of non-POV characters to show what they’re thinking and feeling via nonverbal communication. Their body language, facial expressions, and tone of voice all can give your reader insights into these characters’ thoughts and feelings. 

Looking out: Using a POV character’s senses

As a novelist, think like a screenwriter when you write descriptions. If you have only one POV character in your scene, imagine that he has a camera mounted on his forehead. What would that camera see? Describe that and only that. You’re not allowed to describe anything your POV character can’t see, hear, smell, taste, or touch.

Why this limitation? Why not show everything there is to see? The answer is that by limiting yourself to what the POV character can sense, you’re reinforcing the powerful illusion that your reader actually is the POV character. Because your POV character is limited, your reader must be also.
Some point-of-view choices — third-person objective, omniscient, and  head-hopping — don’t limit you to a single POV character. In that case, you still need to choose some location for your imaginary camera. Don’t give your reader vertigo by jumping the camera around at random.
  Add description economically, without unnecessary references to the POV character. The example could’ve started out this way:
You see a guy with long, greasy black hair . . . 
The extra words “You see” add nothing to the scene, so they’re wasted words. The reader knows that she’s inside the head of the POV character, so she doesn’t need to be told who’s doing the seeing. Only one possible character could be seeing. You almost never need to tell the reader who is doing the seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching. No person ever thinks, “I’m seeing a tiger.” Instead, they just see the tiger.
Looking in: Showing a character’s attitude toward what she sees
Modern novelists weave snippets of description right along with action, dialogue, interior emotion, and interior monologue into a tightly woven emotive tapestry that’s highly personalized — it reflects a character’s inner state, not the actual state of the world.
  Filter your description through the brain and emotions of your POV character (if you have one), noting only the details the character cares about (as  we explain in Chapter 6, which discusses story world). What words would he use to describe what he’s seeing? Use those words. What value judgments would he place on what he’s seeing? Use value-loaded words that reflect those judgments.
For instance, if Jack is looking at the tiger that killed his daughter, then this might be what the reader sees: “The tiger’s malevolent eyes gleamed yellow in the moonlight.” The word malevolent is Jack’s value judgment of what he’s seeing. Jack hates this killing machine, and the reader does, too, without having to be told.
If you don’t have a POV character, then you need to make a decision about how you’ll filter those descriptions. Will you filter them through the brain and emotions of the focal character? The author? Some omniscient narrator? 
These days, it’s not so popular to let the author or a narrator intrude into the story, so think carefully about your choice.

On the surface: Revealing characters by their appearances

As a novelist, you can’t get directly inside your non-POV characters to tell their thoughts and feelings using interior monologue or thoughts. But you can use description to still give the reader some insight into those thoughts and feelings, not to mention the character’s backstory, current behavioral patterns, personality, and more.
For instance, a person’s way of dressing tells you a lot about him. Likewise, his personal grooming or lack of it. His facial expressions tell you even more. Look at the example in detail and see what readers find out from the unhappy writer who attacks you at the conference:

  ✓ The long, greasy black hair tells you that he either doesn’t care much about his appearance or he’s making a statement about who he is.

  ✓ The scar tells you he’s a guy who’s been in a fight.

  ✓ The scruffy sideburns shout that he’s not concerned about his looks, and the gray speckles place him roughly in his forties.

  ✓ The black leather and chains are a statement. Context matters: At a writing conference where most writers are trying to look professional, the statement is pretty sharply worded.

  ✓ The nunchakus are an implied threat.

  ✓ The dilated pupils warn of drug abuse and a high likelihood of violence.

  ✓ The stream of tobacco reinforces the message that he’s a tough customer.

  ✓ The stubble on his chin screams “unprofessional.” Note that description often plays to stereotypes. We’ve chosen to highlight every possible stereotype. But of course, we have options. If we were to replace the black leather and chains with a flamingo-pink three-piece suit, we’d be merrily muddying the waters by sending conflicting messages. As a writer, you choose what sort of message you want to send your reader. (For advice on avoiding stereotypes, flip to Chapter 7.) We recommend the chapter titled “Particularity” in Stein on Writing, by Sol Stein (St. Martin’s Griffin), for some insights into description. Some authors who excel at description of the physical environment include Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in his Sherlock Holmes series; Tom Clancy in The Hunt for Red October and its sequels; and James Swain in Grift Sense and its sequels. Some novels that use description of characters very well are: Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon; The Godfather, by Mario Puzo; and A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens.

Flashback

A flashback is a container for a scene set earlier in the story. A flashback shows what happened “back then” in real-time, just as if it were happening now. You show it using exactly the same techniques you use anywhere else — action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description. The only thing distinctive about a flashback is that it has two transition points, one at the beginning and one at the end.
  A flashback is not narrative summary. It is not a character reminiscing about the past. Despite what some writing teachers might tell you, flashback is not a crime against humanity. You don’t want to overdo flashbacks, but they can be a useful tool. 
You use a flashback when you have a definite need to show some backstory using all the showing tools at your disposal — action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description. (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of backstory and why it’s important for your characters.) You have other options, of course. You could use narrative summary. You could have one character pull the backstory out of another using dialogue. You could even have a character piece it together from evidence discovered — an old book or newspaper clipping.
  If you use flashbacks, you need a reason. Your reader will naturally wonder why you didn’t simply start your story earlier if the flashback is so important. Make it clear within the story why the flashback is necessary. For example, if some event happened 20 years before the story started, that’s a good reason to use a flashback instead of starting the story 20 years early. 
  Readers won’t care about backstory until they care about your characters, so hold off on using flashbacks until you have your readers firmly inside the skin of your POV character. However, after you’ve done that, then a flashback is a workable way to show backstory, so long as you don’t overdo the technique.Here’s an example that gives several paragraphs of flashback. Notice the transitions in and out of the flashback. Also notice, that in the first paragraph of the flashback, we switch to past tense. In all following paragraphs, we revert to present tense.
That tobacco juice triggers a memory of this same writing conference, a year ago. You were pacing under a tree, checking your watch every five seconds, waiting for your appointment with a big-shot editor. Your sample chapters were damp with sweat. “Dude, you look wasted,” says a voice behind you. “Waiting for an editor?”

You turn and see a guy who looks like Central Casting’s clichéd idea of a Hell’s Angel wannabe. You give him a weak grin. “Yeah, I’m kind of  nervous.” “What’s your story about?” he spits a slug of tobacco juice onto the tree right next to you. You flinch at the reek of the juice. “I’m writing a suspense novel about a bus driver having dreams about an impending terrorist attack on Disneyland, just like the ones he was having right before 9/11.” His eyes light up. “Yeah? Dude, that’s like exactly the kind of dreams I been having lately. You got North Koreans in your story? And ATF goons?” “ATF?” You know you’ve heard that acronym somewhere, but your mind isn’t quite in gear right now. “Alcohol, tobacco, firearms.” He spits again. “Watch out, dude. They’re here at the conference. Watching. Don’t look now, but there’s one on the  balcony with binoculars zooming on us now.” You spin around to look. There isn’t any ATF agent on the balcony. When you turn back to your new friend, he’s gone. Disappeared completely. Was he real? The only evidence is that stream of tobacco juice on the tree.
Now, a year later, he’s back, and he’s stepping toward you on cat-quick feet, swinging his nunchakus slowly, his face twisted into a scowl.
The tricky parts of a flashback are the entry and exit points. Your goal is to make a seamless transition each way.

Getting into a flashback

To get into a flashback, you have to do three things in the correct order:

  1.  Make an explicit reference to a memory.

    In our example, we do this with the sentence “That tobacco juice triggers a memory of this same writing conference, a year ago.” Note that we’re going to use the tobacco juice as a sensory device on both ends of the flashback, a common technique.

  2.  Immediately begin the new scene as if it were any other scene, using a different verb tense than you were using before the flashback.

    In our example, we follow up immediately with this sentence: “You were pacing under a tree, checking your watch every five seconds, waiting for your appointment with a big-shot editor.” This is the same POV character, but now temporarily using the past tense, instead of the present tense that we were using in the main scene.

  3.  After you’ve established the transition to the past, switch back to the original tense. 

    This rescues you from using past-perfect tense for an entire flashback, if your original scene was in past tense. That’s really all there is to getting in. Continue the flashback until it’s over.

Getting back to the main story

  To get out of a flashback, reverse the steps you used to get in:

  1.  If possible, tie back in to whatever sensory device you used to get into the flashback.

    In our example, we use the one sentence “The only evidence is that stream of tobacco juice on the tree.”

  2.  Bring the reader back to the present with a time reference.

    In our example, we do this as follows: “Now, a year later, he’s back, and he’s stepping toward you on cat-quick feet, swinging his nunchakus slowly, his face twisted into a scowl.” 
You’re now fully back in the scene that you interrupted and ready to move forward to complete the scene.
  Flashbacks provide you with an excellent way to show large amounts of back-story. Be creative in your transitions. The Harry Potter series uses a Pensieve — a magical container that holds memories — to transmit a number of essential memories of Professors Dumbledore and Snape to young Harry Potter. Each foray into the Pensieve is a flashback that gives Harry crucial insights into a world he is too young to remember.
Sol Stein devotes a chapter to flashbacks in his book, Stein on Writing (St. Martin’s Griffin).
We recommend that you be cautious in using flashbacks, especially near the beginning of your story. Some examples in which flashbacks play an important role are: The Man From St. Petersburg, by Ken Follett; and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, by J. K. Rowling. Both books delay showing the flashbacks as long as possible, making sure that the reader is well into the story first.

Narrative summary and  other forms of telling

Narrative summary, exposition, and static description are tools for telling, rather than showing. Here’s how they compare:

  ✓ Narrative summary: Narrative summary is the telling of part of a story by summarizing events that happen over a stretch of time instead of showing events moment by moment. You can use narrative summary to summarize actions, dialogue, feelings, thoughts, and description. An example of narrative summary is
   “George Smiley walked six miles through London in the fog, pondering how to trap his nemesis, Karla.”

  ✓ Exposition: Writers distinguish narrative summary from exposition, which is an explanation of some set of facts. Here’s an example of  exposition:
   “Karla was the wily head of Moscow Centre, a man who had lured Smiley’s colleague, Bill Haydon, into becoming a double agent.”

  ✓ Static description: Writers also distinguish narrative summary from static description, which is the description of a scene, person, or thing shown from outside any character’s head. An example of static description is
   “A lone streetlamp glowed in the fog on a deserted street on the outskirts of London.”

Because listing all these techniques for telling is tedious, we often use the catch-all term narrative summary when we really mean any or all of them.
One important thing to keep in mind about narrative summary is that it violates the rule “show, don’t tell.” Why would you ever do such a thing? After all, showing is your golden key for giving your reader a powerful emotional experience by putting your reader directly inside the skin of a POV character.
  What does narrative summary accomplish that would justify using it? Here are some answers:

  ✓ Narrative summary is a quick and efficient way to give your reader information or opinion. You don’t really want to show everything going on in the lives of your characters; you want to compress those things that don’t advance the story so you can focus on those things that do.

Narrative summary allows you to quickly cover a substantial amount of time (and distance) and summarize a long sequence of events. Some things that would be tedious to show can be told quickly and painlessly.

  ✓ You need to vary the pace of your storytelling, and narrative summary gives your reader a breather after an intensely paced scene.
Our example contains two closing paragraphs of narrative summary, which serve as a bridge to take us from a fairly absurd story into a serious discussion of the main tools that you have for writing your scenes. Here are the closing paragraphs of the scene we’ve been composing through this chapter, both of which are narrative summary:
As he approaches, it occurs to you that you’ve just experienced every one of the main tools that a writer has for “showing” a scene. You began with some action, followed by dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description. Then you transitioned in and out of a flashback. Now, finally, you’re summarizing your scene with a bit of narrative summary. As the nunchakus scream toward your head, it occurs to you that only a fiction writer would analyze his life in terms of the basic units of fiction while he’s getting beat up by a crazy thug. Apparently, you’re a  real writer.

  Here are some guidelines for writing narrative summary:

  ✓ Keep it short. The fewer words of narrative summary that you can get by with, the happier your reader will be. Your reader is not reading for facts. She’s reading for feelings. Give her what she paid for.

  ✓ Convey interesting information. If you’re going to make your reader wade through narrative summary, make it as interesting as possible. Odd or surprising facts are always interesting, and so is critical information that explains mysteries about your characters or the story world. Vivid, concrete details that create strong sensory images are always welcome to your reader.

  ✓ Use a strong voice. If the way you string together words and phrase your sentences is strong and distinctive and entertaining, it’ll keep your reader with you.

  ✓ If possible, be brilliant. Readers don’t mind reading narrative summary when it’s dazzlingly wonderful. Literary novelists typically use larger blocks of narrative summary than commercial writers. They get away with this because they do it beautifully. Yet remember that many readers don’t care for literary fiction, precisely because they don’t want to bother with narrative summary, no matter how brilliant.

Beginning writers tend to overuse narrative summary, which is why we continually caution you against it. It’s just plain difficult to give your reader a powerful emotional experience using narrative summary. Most of the time, you’ll find it more valuable to focus on the emotive experience using action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, description, and flashback. But you’ll find narrative summary useful when you need to bridge gaps in space or time, to give your reader information, to express opinions, or simply to break up the pace. When you do, make those words count.
Numerous novels include a healthy dose of well-done narrative summary. A few of our favorites include: The Godfather, by Mario Puzo; The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time, by Mark Haddon; The Kite Runner, by Khaled Hosseini; Girl With a Pearl Earring, by Tracy Chevalier; and The Day of the Jackal, by Frederick Forsyth.
We recommend the chapter titled “Show and Tell” in Self-Editing for Fiction Writers, by Renni Browne and Dave King (Harper), for some additional advice on when and when not to use narrative summary.

The Secret of Showing

Earlier in this chapter, we take the art of showing to bits and study every part in detail. But fiction is more than the sum of its bits — there’s a right way and a wrong way to put Humpty together again. You must put the parts together in a way that is

  ✓ Understandable: In real life, everything happens at once. You have to disentangle this into a stream of words that focus first on one character and then another so that the jumble of action makes sense to the reader.

  ✓ Emotive: You must create the illusion that your reader is your POV character (or your focal character, if you have no POV characters or several).

  ✓ Believable: You need to make the reader believe that cause and effect are operating in your universe, yet you must avoid predictability.
All this is hard, which is why writing fiction is a difficult craft to master. In this section, we show you what we consider to be the most important techniques in all of fiction writing. If you master nothing else in the craft of fiction, master these techniques.

Sorting it all out 

Modern fiction writers don’t show or tell fiction willy-nilly. There’s a pattern to storytelling, one which you already know from dialogue. In dialogue, you show one person speaking, then another, then another. Each speaker gets his own paragraph, and no other person is allowed to speak in that paragraph. If one character interrupts another, then the words of the first speaker get cut off abruptly — you simply can’t show the words of both speakers over-printed on top of each other.
That’s different from real life. In real conversations among real people, having two or even three people speaking simultaneously is common. Your brain can often sort this all out and keep track of the separate speakers, but even if your brain gets confused, your ear still hears all the sounds simultane-ously. You can’t do that in writing dialogue, and that’s why writers use the convention of putting the words of each person into a separate paragraph. The reader simply wouldn’t tolerate “everyone talking at once” in a novel. Likewise for the other methods of showing.
  The modern writer doesn’t try to show “everything happening at once.” Nor does she show “everyone feeling at once” or “everyone thinking at once.” Instead, she focuses on different characters in turn, giving each character one or more paragraphs in which to act, talk, feel, think, and look. That paragraph or group of paragraphs forms a unit in fiction — the lowest layer of plot complexity. We need a technical term for this unit of fiction. Since there doesn’t seem to be such a technical term, we’re going to create one. We’ll use the analogy of a film clip, which is a sequence of video frames.
We define a clip to be a sequence of sentences focused on a single character that contains any mix of action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description.
Here is an example clip that contains only dialogue: “You must throw the Ring of Power into the Cracks of Doom,” said Gandalf.
Here is an example clip that combines action with dialogue and interior monologue: Frodo staggered up the sides of Mount Doom. “Sam, we’re almost there.” Was that the entrance to the Cracks of Doom? 
Here is an example clip that combines description with action and dialogue: Gollum stared out of the cave, shading his eyes against the sun with long, gnarled fingers. Snarling, he lunged at Frodo. “Precious!”
A clip can contain as many paragraphs as you need. In scenes with more than one character, clips rarely continue more than about three paragraphs, because a clip focuses on a single character. (That’s our definition of a clip.) As soon as you switch focus to a new character, you’re writing a new clip. Most scenes therefore have dozens of clips, because most scenes have two or more characters interacting with each other dozens of times.

The key thing to remember is that each clip focuses on a single character. When you switch focus to a different character, one clip has ended and a new one has begun. This idea is crucial to writing focused scenes.

Understanding the two kinds of clips

Writers use two different kinds of clips, depending on whether they focus on the POV character or a non-POV character. Remember that the reader sees the POV character from inside, and has access to that character’s private thoughts and feelings. The reader sees the non-POV character from the outside, and therefore sees only the “public face” of that character. So we distinguish these two kinds of clips: 

  ✓ Private clip: This type of clip focuses on a POV character and has access to that character’s private thoughts and feelings. In a private clip, your reader sees the world through the POV character’s eyes. The reader sees the POV character’s actions, dialogue, interior emotion, and interior monologue privately — from the inside.

  ✓ Public clip: This type of clip focuses on a non-POV character and has access only to the publicly viewable part of the character. The reader sees the character’s actions, dialogue, and description publicly — from the outside. The reader may be able to guess the character’s thoughts and emotions from facial expressions and body language, but the reader can never know for sure what’s going on inside that character.
  After many years of writing and teaching fiction, we believe that the single most important secret to writing great fiction is to master the knack of writing clips well — both private clips and public clips. When you alternate between private clips and public clips in your scene, the reader experiences life the way the POV character does. The private clips show the reader what’s going on inside the POV character. The public clips show the reader what the POV character sees the other characters doing.This is exactly the way you experience the world. You have a rich private life with a whole complex of thoughts and feelings that you can’t share with the world, even though you try to do so through your actions and your words. You can try to understand others by the information they make publicly available — their actions, words, and facial expressions, but you don’t always succeed.  If you have a POV character, then by writing fiction using alternating private clips and public clips, you give the reader the uncanny feeling that she is the POV character. If you don’t have a POV character, then you show your reader only public clips of all your characters, giving your fiction a cinematic feel.

Writing public clips

Writing a public clip is straightforward. A public clip shows the reader anything the POV character is able to see, hear, smell, taste, or touch. Because the reader knows that the POV character is the person doing the seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching, you don’t have to say so. All you have to do is show the sensory input.You can use any combination of the following three tools in your public clips:

  ✓ Action

  ✓ Dialogue

  ✓ Description

We pick up our example scene immediately after the flashback and write a public clip that focuses on your nemesis. Up till now, our example scene has generally used only one or two tools at a time, first action, then dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and description. Here, we mix and match to get a more typical public clip. It begins with dialogue, switches to action, then shows some description — all of the typical elements in a public clip:
“Nobody steals ideas from me.” Your opponent glides toward you on cat-quick feet, swinging his nunchakus slowly, his face twisted into a scowl. His conference name-tag says, “Hi! My name is: Hack Moore.” 

Writing private clips

Writing a private clip is more complex, because you’re showing the reader what’s going on both inside and outside your POV character. A private clip shows the reader anything the POV character does, says, feels, or thinks. It does not usually show anything the POV character sees, hears, smells, or tastes. (Those normally come in a public clip that focuses on some other character.) The way private clips work depends on the point of view (POV) you’ve chosen. See Chapter 7 for a discussion of POV. Look at how the different  POV choices work (or don’t work) with private clips:

  ✓ First person: This is a common choice of POV, and it’s a good one if you’re just discovering how to write private clips. Staying inside the head of the POV character is easy in first person. You just show the reader “everything I do, say, feel, and think.”

✓ Third person: This is the most common choice of POV because readers seem to prefer it. This works very well with private clips. You need to discipline yourself to tell the thoughts and feelings of only the POV char-acter, and nobody else, but it’s an easy discipline to master.

  ✓ Third person objective: This is not such a common POV choice, because you can’t get inside the focal character’s head. You’re restricting yourself to what the focal character does and says and to the descriptions of his facial features. This means that you can’t write private clips at all in third person objective. You have to write your entire story using public clips for all characters. This is a tight constraint, and you may find yourself wishing for regular third person. 

  ✓ Head-hopping: Writing teachers routinely try to discourage writers from using this POV choice. The reason is that you’re now allowed to use private clips for any character you like. There’s no special character in your scene that your reader can exclusively identify with. This can quickly destroy any illusion that your reader actually is one of the characters. You have to work extra hard as a writer to make your reader identify with your lead character. Is it worth it, when you could choose a different POV that limits you to one character? You decide.

  ✓ Omniscient: Many writing teachers absolutely loathe this POV choice, for all the same reasons that they hate head hopping. Not only can you write private clips for any character, but you also can switch to a god-like point of view. Not many readers suffer from the delusion that they’re gods, so now you have a really tough job. Furthermore, you’re tempted in this POV to use lots of narrative summary — telling, rather than showing. We remind you that it’s possible to write a powerful novel in omniscient POV — if you have the skills to handle it.

  ✓ Second person: This is the rarest POV choice, because it requires you to convince the reader at every point that he or she would do what the POV character does. If you can manage it (we take a stab at it in this chapter), then it has all the advantages of first person. Maintaining discipline and writing private clips that show “everything you do, say, feel, and think” is easy.

You can use any of the following four tools in your private clips:

  ✓ Action

  ✓ Dialogue

  ✓ Interior emotion

  ✓ Interior monologue

You must get one complication right in your private clips: the order. Action, dialogue, and interior monologue normally take a bit of time in real life —  usually at least half a second and often more. These are rational activities, and getting your rational brain in gear takes time. The one exception is reflexive or instinctive actions or dialogue, which can happen much faster (touch a burning stove — your hand jerks back in roughly a tenth of a second and you make an unintelligible cry of pain an instant later). These are nonrational responses, so they can happen more quickly. Interior emotion often happens even faster. If a wild tiger leaps through your window, you feel a lightning bolt of fear much sooner than you can respond either rationally or nonrationally.  Here’s a simple rule to use: Show first whatever happens fastest. Most often, this means that you show interior emotion first, followed by various instinctive actions or dialogue, followed by the more rational kinds of action, dialogue, and interior monologue.
Continuing with our example scene, we now show a private clip that mixes all the tools at our disposal. We begin with a sentence of interior emotion, follow it up with an action, then some interior monologue, then another action, and finally close with two sentences of dialogue:
Your heart is hammering in your throat. You raise your leather portfolio to chest height. Maybe a little negotiation will calm things down. You put on your chummiest smile. “Hack, can we talk about this? We had a great time chatting last year, didn’t we?”

Putting cause and effect together

In the preceding sections, we explain how to write public clips and private clips. The only thing left is to keep stringing them together through a full scene.
  Here’s a critical rule: Always get the time sequence correct and always put the cause before the effect. Normally, each private clip will be at least partly the cause of the public clip that follows it. Normally, each public clip will be at least partly the cause of the private clip that follows it.
Here we continue our scene for a few more clips to see how this plays out in practice. Study the following example and identify each public clip and each private clip. Which tools do we use in each one? Could you change the order of any of the parts within the internal clips? Hack lunges forward, swinging his nunchakus in a great arcing circle at your head.

You twist to one side, throwing your portfolio up as a shield.
The nunchakus crash against it, sending a shock wave through your shoulder.
Pain slices into your neck like a hot knife. “Aughhh!” You keep twisting your body sideways, grab Hack’s hair in your right hand, yank it viciously down, and raise your knee.
Hack’s momentum carries him into a face-plant against your kneecap. 
The nunchakus fall out of his nerveless hands and he sags to the floor.
A dozen people begin screaming at once. Four guys jump on Hack’s arms and legs, pinning him to the ground. “Somebody call the cops!”
You stagger backward. Your stomach feels horribly queasy and your collarbone is screaming — probably broken. What must your editor be thinking?
Friendly hands guide you back into your chair. “Are you all right?” your editor asks. “Wow, that was amazing! You . . . did great. You people, call an ambulance!”
A soft, muzzy blackness begins oozing down over your eyes. You fight the darkness as long as you can, knowing that someday, somehow, you’re going to work this into a novel.
In the preceding example, we count five public clips (three focusing on Hack, one on the numerous bystanders, and one on your editor). We also see four private clips. Showing more than one public clip in a row, each focusing on different characters, is fine. In scenes with a number of characters, it’s common to show two or even three public clips for each private clip.
You may be wondering if you must change paragraphs every time you transition to a new clip. No, you can paragraph your scenes however you want. We prefer to break paragraphs between clips for clarity. That’s the way everybody paragraphs dialogue, and we think it makes sense to do so, even when we add action, interior emotions, interior monologue, and description into the mix. Paragraph your scenes in a way that feels natural to you. The only unbreakable rule in writing fiction is that there are no unbreakable rules.  Your reader experiences the scene from inside the skin of the POV character, so you want to give as much air time as possible to your POV character. But you have to balance that with the needs of the scene. When a lot is happening outside your POV character, you need to show the important parts. Notice that nowhere do we get inside Hack’s head nor try to show interior emotion or interior monologue for him. We don’t need to. The reader wants the thoughts and feelings of only one character — the POV character.

We owe a great debt to Dwight Swain’s classic book, Techniques of the Selling Writer (University of Oklahoma Press), which contains a long discussion of “motivation-reaction units.” Swain’s term “motivation” is nothing more nor less than a public clip. His term “reaction” is identical to what we call a private clip.

MARGINALIA:

Balancing showing and telling tools

We find certain books indispensable in understanding the craft of writing. We’ve referred to several of them in this chapter. For your convenience, we gather them all here:

 ✓  Techniques  of  the  Selling  Writer (University of Oklahoma Press), by Dwight Swain: Great info on “motivation-reaction units.”

 ✓  Empowering  Characters’  Emotions,  by Margie  Lawson:  A  terrific  resource  on nonverbal communication in actions and on  showing  interior  emotion.  This  online course is available on Dr. Lawson’s Web site at www.margielawson.com.

 ✓  Stein on Writing (St . Martin’s Griffin), by Sol Stein: Great advice on showing and tell-ing, dialogue, flashbacks, and much more.

 ✓  Self-Editing for Fiction Writers (Harper), by Renni Browne and Dave King: An essential guide to editing, with strong chapters on dialogue, interior monologue, and narrative summary.

 ✓  Getting Into Character (Wiley), by Brandilyn Collins: The information on subtexting in dialogue is worth the price of the book all by itself.




}
{

Chapter 11

Thinking Through Your Theme

In This Chapter

Why theme is important

Themes for 20 best-selling novels

Why you should think about theme last

Discovering your theme

Fiction is art, and all art carries a message of some sort. We call that message the theme of your story. A theme is the deep meaning of your novel, and many great novels pack powerful themes. Of course, a novel can have a thin or ambiguous theme and still be a fine story. Themes are important, but they’re not as important as giving your reader a powerful emotional experience.
In this chapter, we take a stab at analyzing the themes of a number of best-selling novels. Our purpose here is not to do a deep literary analysis. We just want to demystify the idea of theme by giving you some examples of themes for novels that you’re likely to have read.
Also, although theme is important, we believe that building your novel around a theme is hazardous. That feels too much like a sermon, not entertainment. Far better to let your theme grow naturally out of your story. You may not know what the theme of your novel is until you’ve revised it several times, so part of your problem as an author is to figure out what your story means. Later in this chapter, we give you several techniques to help you do that. 

Understanding Why Your Theme Matters

People mean different things when they talk about theme, so we give our definition of it here: Theme is the deep meaning of your book. It’s the central message you’re trying to get across to your reader. It may be “the moral of the story,” if you wrote your story to have a moral. It may be your own vision of how the world works, your philosophy of life, or your recipe for the perfect brownie. Your theme is whatever you want it to be.
  You may be wary of “message-driven art” and rightly so. We’re extremely wary of it ourselves. But you should also be wary of meaningless art. Art has meaning, just as food has flavor. It’s a mistake to make that flavor either too strong or too weak.
In this section, we discuss the usefulness of having a theme, explain what a theme looks like, and provide sample themes of 20 best-selling novels.

Looking at why writers include themes in their novels

  Different readers will read your story through their own mindsets, so they may come away from your novel with a different theme than the one you intended. Furthermore, truly great fiction may well contain a number of themes. Therefore, the theme of any novel is always ambiguous and open  to debate. That’s part of what makes reading fun.
Unless readers plan to analyze your novel for a report or book club, they probably won’t be too concerned about getting the “right” interpretation of your story — they’ll care more about what the story means to them. For the writer, theme is important because your story is the only contact most readers will have with you. The novel is your chance to show others how you view the world.
Consider this: You’re reading an online review of your first novel, which has just been released. It’s a good review, all things considered. The reviewer’s summary of the storyline follows the one you provided your editor years ago. And the reviewer loves your characters, calling them “strong and true.” He also praises your fast action and snappy dialogue. Generally, he likes your novel. You’re holding your breath when you get to the closing paragraph, which runs like this: “In the end, though, the author’s vapid vision of nihilistic existential despair leaves the reader feeling both exhausted and depressed.” Your jaw bounces a few times on your desktop. Huh? Since when do you have a vapid vision of nihilistic existential despair? What does that even mean? This reviewer doesn’t get your vision at all. He’s an idiot. It’s entirely possible that the reviewer is an idiot. However, it’s also possible that the reason that he doesn’t get your vision is that you haven’t given him enough evidence to figure it out. Lacking any idea of what your vision may be, the reviewer latches onto minor things you never intended to be central symbols. Hence that pesky “nihilistic existential despair” — probably taken from a throwaway line by a side character in a minor scene. What went wrong? That’s easy. Your story has a weak theme or none at all. 

Examining the features of a theme 

We like to summarize a theme in one sentence. It doesn’t have to be a deep sentence (although it’s nice if it is). But we’ll be blunt: If your novel isn’t deep, the theme sentence for it can’t be deep, either. Not everyone likes deep fiction, and that’s okay. The purpose of fiction is to give the reader a powerful emotional experience. The theme is an extra. If the emotional experiences you arouse in your reader are powerful enough, then she’ll probably buy into your theme. Otherwise, she probably won’t. 

  Your theme should have these features:

  ✓ True: Your theme sentence should express some truth about the world.

  ✓ Important: Your theme should be about the significant stuff in life.

  ✓ Short: Your theme should be a single sentence, not a manifesto.

Example themes for 20 novels

A good way to figure out how to write a theme sentence is to look at some examples. Be aware that every reader is going to take away something slightly different from your novel. If it’s a deep novel, different readers may take away very different things. Most of the novels we analyze here are pretty deep, so what we took away from them may be different from what you take away from them. We may even be wildly off. Try your own hand at defining the themes for these books and then compare your themes to ours. Is there some common ground? That’s likely to be part of the author’s intended message. We’re going to resist the urge to find as many themes as possible in these. Our theme sentences will give the main message that we personally took away from each of these novels.
We’ll admit right away that we had to guess at some of these themes. Not all of the authors felt it necessary to give their works a clear theme. Some authors prefer simply to entertain, without creating a message for their fiction. You may object that we’re assuming that it’s actually possible to discover the author’s intent. Yes, we do. If we thought an author’s intent was impossible to discover, we wouldn’t be writing this book. The author always runs the risk of being misunderstood, but we believe he also runs a very reasonable risk of being understood. We hope you’ll understand:

  ✓ The Lord of the Rings, by J. R. R. Tolkien (fantasy): “Good ultimately conquers evil, because evil defeats itself.”
   We’ve rephrased a famous sentence from the book: “Oft evil will shall evil mar.” The novel is an epic tale of the battle between good and evil. 

  ✓ River God, by Wilbur Smith (historical action-adventure): “Genius and guile are a match for raw strength.”
   The theme for this novel is nowhere spelled out, so this is what we took away from the novel. It’s an adventure tale set in ancient Egypt, with the genius slave Taita as narrator and lead character. Adventure novels typically put little importance on theme.

  ✓ The Clan of the Cave Bear, by Jean Auel (historical): “Neanderthals are real people, too.”
   The lead character Ayla is a young human girl who grows up in an adoptive family of Neanderthals. The story makes clear how genetically close the Neanderthal lineage is to the human.

  ✓ The Pillars of the Earth, by Ken Follett (historical thriller): “No man stands above the law.”
   This novel is a saga spanning half a century, ending about the time of the murder of Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury. Although we can’t be sure that we’ve captured Follett’s intent for the theme of this story, it’s certainly plausible in view of one of the final scenes. But another theme may be, “What goes around, comes around.” That’s a cliché, but clichés often work nicely as themes, even for deep novels.

  ✓ Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon (time-travel romance): “Love conquers all.”
   This is a romance novel, a genre not noted for deep themes. Perhaps our theme sentence actually applies to all romance novels. That’s perfectly okay. Themes need not be unique or profound. Fiction is not philosophy. Fiction is about creating a powerful emotional experience. We think Outlander is an outstanding story and that this theme sentence applies especially well to it.

  ✓ My Name is Asher Lev, by Chaim Potok (literary): “A great artist cannot avoid experiencing great pain — and inflicting it.”
   The themes of literary novels are often profound. This is a deep novel by a deep novelist, and the theme is correspondingly deep. We think this novel is especially interesting to fiction writers, who may well identify with the lead character, Asher Lev. It’s one of the best fictional portraits of an artist that we’ve seen.

✓ The Kite Runner, by Khaled Hosseini (literary): “There is a way to be good again.”
   We’ve quoted a sentence from the first chapter which represents well the core truth of this book.

  ✓ The Lovely Bones, by Alice Sebold (literary): “There is justice in this universe.”
   This novel is a bit hazy in its theme, and we’ve had to guess as to its intended meaning. Literary novels can be very ambiguous in their themes.

  ✓ The Speed of Dark, by Elizabeth Moon (literary): “To thine own self be true.”
   Taking a quotation from literature as your theme sentence is perfectly okay. This one is a quote from Shakespeare’s Hamlet, and it seems particularly appropriate for this novel. The lead character is a high-functioning autistic who is offered a chance to be cured. But will the cure change his fundamental identity? It’s a hard choice, and who’s to say which is the right answer? 

  ✓ The Time Traveler’s Wife, by Audrey Niffenegger (literary): “There is a love that transcends time.”
   This romantic literary novel is unforgettable. The lead character Clare is married to Henry, a man with a genetic defect that causes him to time-travel during moments of high stress. Can their love survive this wrinkle in time? Yes, but . . .

  ✓ Girl with a Pearl Earring, by Tracy Chevalier (literary historical): “A great artist will sacrifice everything for his art.”
   The theme for this novel is similar to that of My Name is Asher Lev. In both cases, a great artist is at the center of the story. In Girl with a Pearl Earring, the lead character is a young servant in the home of Johannes Vermeer, and the story provides a possible backstory for a famous painting by Vermeer.

  ✓ Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen (romance): “A man’s character is more important than his money, looks, or good humor.”
   Austen is a deep writer, and her novels can be assigned any number of themes, but we think ours is as good as any. Heroine Lizzie Bennet would like to fall in love with the man she marries, but not just any man. More than anything, she wants a man of strong character. A pleasant, pliable man like Mr. Bingley won’t do for Lizzie; she needs a man like Mr. Darcy.

  ✓ Contact, by Carl Sagan (science fiction): “God is a mathematician.”
   Carl Sagan’s novel about the first contact between humanity and aliens provides him with a platform to sound any number of themes, and it’s not easy to decide which may have been most important to Sagan. The novel speculates on a possible truce in the long-running feud between science and religion.

✓ Gorky Park, by Martin Cruz Smith (mystery): “No good deed goes unpunished.”
   We’ve chosen a well-known aphorism as the theme for this story about an honest cop who does his job in a dirty world.

  ✓ Blink, by Ted Dekker (Christian thriller): “God is in control, whether you think so or not.”
   This is a fairly common theme in Christian fiction and it resonates well with Dekker’s core audience.

  ✓ The Da Vinci Code, by Dan Brown (thriller): “Everything you thought you knew about Jesus is wrong.”
   The storyline essentially stops in the middle for three chapters while one of the characters expounds on this theme at length. The novel is heavily theme-oriented, which helped drive sales among those who liked the theme. The book drew sharp attacks from historians, who argued that everything Brown thinks he knows about Jesus is wrong. Those attacks made for great publicity, which also helped drive sales.

  ✓ The Man From St. Petersburg, by Ken Follett (historical thriller): “The most dangerous man is the one who cannot fear, because then he is impervious to everything except love.”
   Thrillers don’t normally spend much ink on developing themes, but we think we’re close to the truth. The assassin is one of the most likeable and reader-identifiable villains we’ve seen — incapable of fear until he finds a reason to love.

  ✓ The Firm, by John Grisham (legal thriller): “Be careful what you wish for.”
   Grisham’s protagonist Mitch McDeere is a poverty-stricken law student who only wants to get a decent job. He gets a fabulous one, but it comes with conditions that he doesn’t imagine until it’s too late.

  ✓ The Spy Who Came In From the Cold, by John le Carré (spy thriller): “Espionage is a dirty, dirty, dirty, dirty, dirty business.”
   When this novel was published in the early 1960s, spy novels typically featured shallow James Bond-like characters. Le Carré rewrote the rules on what you could do in a spy novel. We think this is still the best spy novel ever written.

  ✓ The Hunt for Red October, by Tom Clancy (military technothriller): “The Evil Empire will destroy itself through its own incompetence.”
   The theme for this novel is quite similar to the one we’ve assigned to The Lord of the Rings. Military technothrillers are often driven by strong principles of justice. Readers in this genre have an unbending sense of right and wrong and they want to see the good prevail and the evil  vanquished.

Deciding When to Identify Your Theme

  Theme is important, no doubt about it. But if you let it, a strong theme can take over your novel. If you write your novel mainly to advance your theme, here are the main hazards awaiting you:

  ✓ Your characters may be shallow. If you know your theme before you create your characters, then you’ll be mightily tempted to create them specifically to illustrate the theme. You’ll be tempted to avoid giving them conflicting values, because one of those values may contradict your theme or confuse your reader.

  ✓ Your plot may be contrived. If you already know your theme before you construct your plot, you’ll find it all too easy to tailor the story exactly to fit the theme. You’ll fear getting sidetracked in story threads or subplots that may detract from the message of the story. You may even cheat on the plot because you need to in order to make the story work out right.

  ✓ You may write a sermon. Of course, if your readers agree with your theme, they won’t consider it a sermon. But the readers who disagree with your theme will definitely consider your story a sermon — a heavy-handed and unwelcome one. A heavily theme-based novel is going to polarize your readership. It may also draw a firestorm of criticism from reviewers, who usually believe that a novel should be about entertainment first.
  Regardless of which creative paradigm you use (see Chapter 4), we believe you should develop your theme last in your story, when you’ve already worked out the main details of your story world, your characters, and your plot. That way, your story doesn’t take a back seat to your message. It’s not uncommon for novelists to write the entire story without really nailing down what it all means. They may in fact write several drafts before they figure it out. We think that’s good. We believe that the strongest themes are those that arise organically out of the story. In the next section, we help you discover the theme of your story.
Despite our advice, you may feel that you want to build a story from the ground up around some theme. You may not be worried at all by the prospect that readers will think you’re preaching a sermon. Is that okay? Yes, it’s your book, so you can write it however you want, but be aware that it’s a high-risk approach. (To be fair, it may also be a high-reward approach).
  If your story appears to be designed solely to promote a theme, agents and editors are going to be deeply suspicious of your work. Editors generally don’t like sermons masquerading as fiction. If that’s the kind of book you want to peddle, they’re going to be much tougher on you than you may have expected.
Because we’re wary of heavily theme-based fiction ourselves, we hate to admit this, but it’s a fact — if you build your novel from the ground up on a theme and if you can get it published, you may possibly see a very high reward for your labors. Many readers love theme-based novels that confirm their own beliefs. If readers fall in love with your theme, they may tell everyone they know, giving you extraordinary word-of-mouth publicity. Most readers only hate theme-based novels that appear to them to be pro-moting the “wrong” message. If some of your readers hate your message, they’ll definitely tell everyone they know, and they may even trash you in public — giving you even more word-of-mouth publicity. You can probably think of several recent massively best-selling novels that you consider pure tripe — dreckish sermons from first wretched word to last. And yet they sold like fire, because there’s no such thing as bad publicity for a fiction writer. Bad publicity just makes a novel that much more likely to wind up in the hands of people who don’t consider it a sermon at all — they think it’s straight, common sense. If you’re going to go this route, you need a boatload of humility, because you may well get wildly undeserved praise from your admirers and at the same time get a hellishly undeserved roasting from your critics. Don’t kid yourself that either your admirers or your critics are telling the truth. They’re reacting to your message, not to you.
  Writing a heavily theme-based novel is high-risk/high-reward. Before you write one, think three times about whether the rewards justify the risks.

Finding Your Theme

How do you find your theme? There isn’t any foolproof way to get there, but this section identifies some possible roads you can take.

Faking it till you make it

You probably have some idea of what the deep meaning of your story is, even from the very first day the idea for the story leaps into your mind. The theme may be fuzzy in your mind, but it’s there. When somebody asks what your theme is, being a little vague is perfectly okay.If you’re writing a romance, for example, you may say, “My story is about the enduring power of love.” Nobody is ever going to criticize that theme, for the simple reason that theme isn’t that big of a deal in a romance novel. Likewise, if you’re writing a thriller, you could say, “My story is about the power of _____.” Fill in the blank with any handy word that fits your story. “Fear” would work. So would “ambition.” So would “ignorance,” “knowledge,” “the little guy,” “multinational corporations,” “religion,” and “technology.” You really can put just about anything in that’s remotely related to your story, and you’ll have a decent working prototype for your theme.
Mystery readers typically are less interested in theme than in a good, original puzzle, so you probably won’t be asked about the theme if you’re writing a mystery. But if you are, you can play the same game as for a suspense novel.
If you’re writing a fantasy novel, you can always say, “It’s about the battle between good and evil.” This probably also works for many horror novels.
  You can be vague for a good long time using evasions like the preceding ones. The nice thing is that they aren’t really evasions. The theme of your novel most likely will be pretty much along the lines you’re claiming. As you work on your story, there may come a day when your theme springs brilliantly into focus. When that happens, you’ll know it. Don’t rush that day. Keep faking it with platitudes until you get there. Is that okay? Of course it is. You’re doing the best you can, working from the abstract to the concrete. Fiction is hard, and figuring out your theme is one of the hardest parts of it. It’s not your fault if you haven’t worked out something deep and profound yet. Nobody has the right to stampede you into coming up with a theme before its time, any more than they have the right to dictate to a vintner when the wine will be ready.
Depending on your category and your target reader and your own goals as a writer and the particular story you’re writing, there may never come a day when a powerful theme emerges. In that case, your theme will always be whatever vague platitude you started with. You aren’t required to have a unique and dazzling theme for your story. The examples that we show earlier in this chapter should make it clear that some novels have clearly defined deep themes, and some are much fuzzier. 

Reading your own novel for the first time

Assume that no voice from heaven has given you an inspired theme for your story. You’ve finished the first draft. You’ve edited it several times. Your story world feels as real as rain. Your characters are strong. Your plot zings at all six layers. And you still don’t quite know what your story’s about.Set your novel aside for a bit. Read somebody else’s work, preferably one with a strong theme. It doesn’t have to be terribly similar to your book; it just needs to be something fresh, preferably a book that many people agree is a really good book. Write a theme sentence for that other book. Now you’re in the frame of mind to come back to your novel. Sit down and read your entire book in one sitting. Pretend that this is the first time you’ve ever read it. Ignore any wording problems or plot choices or character glitches. Just read — fast. When you get to the end, close it and ask yourself, “What’s the author trying to say here?”
That may sizzle your synapses enough to come up with a profound theme sentence. It may. Then again, it may not.

Listening to your characters

If you’ve been careful to build real, three-dimensional characters, then you may want to try listening to them to see what they have to say. Read through some of their best scenes. At any point, do they get on their soap box and start shrieking? Did they surprise you? Did they say something you never would have said yourself? That may make a very nice theme.
  You may also want to try interviewing your characters to find your theme. Imagine you’re a journalist doing a profile of your characters for Time magazine. Ask each character what she learned from her experiences in your story. 
Write down the answers. Is there anything surprising that you hadn’t really thought about? If so, grab it.

Using test readers

  Most writers have any number of friends who love to read. When your novel is fairly well polished, give out copies to a few of your friends and ask them to read it. Promise that you’ll list them in the acknowledgments but only if they finish reading it by a certain deadline. If they meet your deadline, take them out for coffee and debrief them. Ask them what the novel meant to them. Did any of the characters say anything particularly striking? It’s just possible you’ll hit a nerve with one of your readers. If you’ve already got a theme in mind, your test readers will tell you if that theme is resonating with them.

Must you have a theme?

What if, despite your best efforts, you still can’t come up with a strong theme for your novel? What’s the worst that can happen? The worst that can happen is that some readers may read in a theme where none exists. They may accuse you of having a “vapid vision of nihilistic existential despair,” whatever that means. Being misunderstood can be painful, but you won’t die from it.
Other readers will see that you have no theme and will accuse you of being shallow. This is less bad than being misunderstood, but it’s still not fun. Very few writers want to be known as shallow. Again, it won’t kill you, so don’t take it personally.
  Many readers won’t even notice if your novel is missing a deep theme. Readers read for entertainment first, and plenty of them are looking for a nice beach read, not something profound. These readers won’t care if you don’t have a deep theme. 

Refining Your Theme

If you do find your theme, the odds are very high that it won’t be perfectly developed in your story. The reason is that you didn’t write the story merely to illustrate some sappy theme. You wrote the story to move your readers emotively, and in the process, a theme emerged. Now you need to buff that out a bit in your story. Read through your entire novel again, marking places where you could highlight the theme a little. The key word here is a little.
  Strengthen your theme but resist the urge to explain. Your reader is smart. Trust her to figure out what you have to say. What you’re looking for is places in your novel where the theme emerges naturally but it comes out fuzzy or distorted. Clarify those — that’s what we mean when we say you should strengthen your theme.
You’re also looking for places where the theme pokes its head up rather unnaturally — where it seems intrusive, forced, or just plain heavy handed. Trim it back there or take it out. The theme needs to advance the story, not weigh it down. Some of the litmus tests we use are the following: If the theme comes up in narrative summary, then it’s probably the author intruding into the story. If the theme comes up in a character’s dialogue or interior monologue, then it’s probably legitimate, especially if it advances the story. If the theme is hinted at by concrete actions in the story, then it’s almost always legitimate.
Be on the alert for places in your story where you contradict your theme. If you find them, then you can either resolve them so there’s no contradiction, or you can just acknowledge them with a line or two that makes it clear that you know that paradoxes abound and there aren’t any easy answers. Readers are smart and will spot contradictions that they think you missed. But if your characters acknowledge the contradiction — or wrestle with it — then your readers know that you know about it, and you’re off the hook.




}
{

Part III

Editing and Polishing 

Your Story and Characters

In this part . . .
Being able to produce perfect prose in your first draft every time would be great. However, the reality of writing is that great fiction always requires editing and polishing before it’s ready for prime time. In this part, we show you how to analyze your characters, scrutinize your story structure, and edit your scenes.

Chapter 12

Analyzing Your Characters

In This Chapter

Reading through your story with an eye toward characters

Keeping track of character details

Analyzing motivations

Evaluating your choice of narrator and POV character

Improving characters

After you’ve written your story, you need to put on your editing hat and make sure it’s as strong as possible. This begins with a careful analysis of your characters. Great fiction needs great characters, so don’t be afraid to rework your characters until they’re fully alive and three-dimensional.At some point, you should develop a character bible that spells out in one place everything there is to know about each character. You need this to maintain story consistency and to help you create fully rounded characters. It’s wise to start building your character bible before you start writing, even if you don’t know much about your characters. It’s also wise to keep adding to it as you write your story and when you do your high-level read-through after you finish the first draft. However, virtually all writers analyze their charac-ters only after writing the first draft, so we present this tool in this chapter.
In Chapter 7, we discuss the importance of character motivations, which we define as the sum total of a character’s values, ambition, and story goal. You can’t have a story without a story goal — the one concrete thing that your lead character wants to have or to do or to be. Normally, a story goal comes from some abstract ambition of the character. Ambitions ultimately arise from a character’s values — core truths that he believes are so obvious that they can’t and shouldn’t be explained. And where do values come from? That’s a mystery. Values can’t be fully explained, but you can give a good reason for them through your character’s backstory.

You may have written your story in a point of view that seems obvious to you. When you’re ready to edit your story, you need to reexamine that choice, verify that it makes sense for your story, and then check that you’ve been consistent in your POV choices throughout your manuscript.
In this chapter, we take you through the process of analyzing and improving the characters in your story. We discuss keeping track of fine details, revisiting your character’s motivations, making sure your choice of POV works, and strengthening your characters.

The High-Level Read-Through:  Preparing Yourself to Edit

Before you start editing your manuscript, you need to get the big picture. We strongly recommend that you do a high-level read-through to give you that big picture. At this point, you don’t do any actual editing. Instead, you just take notes on what you need to do, using the ideas we cover later in this chapter.
  Read through your complete manuscript, taking notes on every scene. You can take notes on paper, or you can insert comments into your document, using the comment feature on your word processor. Don’t edit anything; your goal is to make sure your characters work. As you read each scene, mentally answer the following questions:

  ✓ Who is the POV character for this scene? Is this the best POV character for this scene?

  ✓ If you’re writing in standard third person, first person, or second person, are you showing only what your POV character sees, hears, thinks, knows, feels, smells, tastes, or touches?

  ✓ If you’re writing in third person objective, do you ever accidentally use interior emotion or interior monologue? Does this mean that you’d secretly like to use the more usual third person?

  ✓ Do your characters have unique and distinctive voices in their dialogue and interior monologue?

  ✓ Are your characters boring, shallow, unbelievable, or unlikeable?After you finish your high-level read-through, you still have to do a lot of work to fix your characters. Go through these steps in order:

  1.  Review all your notes, looking for patterns.

    What are the main problems with each of your characters?

2.  Spend some time meditating on your characters.

    What changes do you need to make to bring your characters up to snuff?

  3.  Revise your character bible for each character to make each one better.

    See the following section for info on how to develop a character bible.

  Don’t make any changes in your manuscript yet. You may have some problems in your story structure and scenes that you also need to fix. Because character and plot are intertwined, you really need to think through them both before you begin making changes. When you make the edits we describe in Chapters 13, 14, and 15, also take into account everything new you discover about your characters in this chapter.

Developing a Bible for Each Character

You’re reading your e-mail from your fans and find one that looks promising. The subject line reads, “Loved your novel!!!!” You open the e-mail and scan it:
Dear Author:
I was up all night reading your novel and loved every word of it. You had me fooled all the way, so congratulations, because I read a lot and it’s hard to pull one over on me. I’m working on a novel of my own. Not that you have to read it, so don’t feel obligated, but are you interested? By the way, can I offer my services as a proofreader? I noticed that Katie Sue has green eyes on page 17, but on page 323, her eyes are brown. And Jonas is 180 pounds on page 3, but three chapters later, he’s up to 210, even though I never noticed him eating a thing. And how is it that his maternal grandmother is Irish the first time we hear about her, Hungarian the second time, and back to Irish at the end? Other than that, great story! Let me know about the proofreading. I’m cheap because I’m only 12.
Your fan, Jim Bob

The fact is that mistakes happen. You’ll never write a perfect book. (If you do, you’ll be insufferable and other authors will treat you the way the other reindeer treated Rudolf.) But your goal should always be perfection, even if you know you’ll never reach it. You’ll be punished for every mistake with letters from a few Jim Bobs, and not all of them will be nice.

One of the most embarrassing mistakes you can make is inconsistency in your characters. Shifting eye color, rapid weight gains or losses, and drifting ethnic heritages are just three of the many inconsistencies that can sneak into your story. When you have only one or two main characters in your book, or when you’ve written only one book, you’re not likely to make many mistakes. But as your characters and books proliferate, they all start blending together. Your protection against all such errors is to write up a bible for your characters. In your character bible, you keep a record of all the details that you need to remember for each character. Your character bible doesn’t need to be fancy. It just needs to get the job done, and you need to save it where you can always find it.

Writers use character bibles for two distinct purposes:

  ✓ As a creative tool: Writing a character bible is a terrific exercise to get to know all the characters in your story. It’s a powerful tool that sparks your creativity in unpredictable ways. You can’t know in advance which details will affect your story and which won’t, so record everything in your character bible, even details you’re sure won’t matter to the story.
   Even if you don’t create your character bible until after you’ve finished your first draft, writing it may suggest new, creative ideas for the second draft. We’ve often seen some of those insignificant details suggest plot developments later in the story. For instance, even if you think you’ll never need to know what your character’s first dog was named, writing down the fact that it was a greyhound may later suggest to you that your character knows all about dog racing and the gambling world.

  ✓ As an editing tool: If you record all the myriad details about each character, you can consult your bible when you have a question about consistency. At 3 a.m. on the night before your book is due, it’s a lot easier to browse through a ten-page character bible looking for Katie Sue’s eye color or Jonas’s weight than it is to search through your entire manuscript.We recommend that you have a special folder on your hard drive named something like “Books Written.” There, make a folder for every book that you write, named with your working title or an abbreviation of it. In the folder for your book, make another folder named “Research” and save your character bible there. You can create a document named “Characters” that contains all the critical information on all the characters in your novel.

What goes into your character bible? Just about anything that helps you understand your characters better or that helps you remember the myriad details that you need to keep straight. We recommend that you consider at least the following main categories:

✓ Physical traits

  ✓ Emotional and family life

  ✓ Intellectual life

  ✓ Backstory and motivation

This section describes these elements in detail.

Physical traits

Physical traits are the easiest things to track and the most embarrassing to get wrong, because there really can’t be any decent explanation when those eyes drift from blue to brown. You should record anything you consider important. Here are a few of the specific traits we recommend that you track:

  ✓ Date of birth and age

  ✓ Height and weight

  ✓ Ethnic heritage

  ✓ Hair and eye color

Include a detailed physical description, including scars or physical handicaps, along with the character’s usual style of dressing.

Emotional and family life

Your readers want to know what your character’s private life is like. This is a bit more open-ended than the physical traits. Here are some points to get you started. Consider these and any other issues that seem appropriate for your characters:

  ✓ What’s your character’s personality like? Describe it in 25 words or less.

  ✓ What kind of sense of humor does your character have?

  ✓ What’s your character’s religious faith? Explain where it came from.

  ✓ What political party does your character belong to and why?

  ✓ What’s the character’s family like? Describe it, including parents, siblings, and children. You may include grandparents, cousins, a spouse, or anyone else relevant.

✓ What are the character’s friends like? Describe them, including your character’s best male friend and best female friend.

  ✓ Who are your character’s enemies? Explain how they came to be enemies.

  ✓ What is in your character’s pockets, wallet, purse, or backpack? Describe the contents in detail.

  ✓ What’s your character’s home like? Describe it in detail.

  ✓ What is your character’s happiest childhood memory? His worst?

  ✓ How would your character describe himself?

  ✓ How would your character’s friends describe him? 

Intellectual and work life

Your character has a public face, including education and possibly a career. Here are some things that you may need to describe in your character bible:

  ✓ Your character’s educational background

  ✓ What sort of employment your character has and his work history

  ✓ Your character’s favorite music, books, and movies

  ✓ Any interesting hobbies

  ✓ Your character’s personal philosophy (and where it came from)

Backstory and motivation

Spelling out your characters’ backstory and motivation in writing somewhere is critical, and your character bible is a fine place to put this info so you’ll always have it handy. Your character bible needs to cover backstory and motivation at some length. If you haven’t worked them out for your main characters, we highly recommend that you work through the exercises in Chapter 7 for each character. There’s simply no substitute for doing these exercises.
In your character bible, aim for a page or more of backstory on each of your main characters and a bit less for the minor characters. You also need at least a few sentences to spell out the values, ambitions, and story goals of your main characters.
  You can work on backstory and motivation at any time, depending on your creative paradigm. (See Chapter 4 for a discussion of your creative paradigm and how it influences the order in which you do your creative work.) If you’re a seat-of-the-pants writer or an edit-as-you-go writer, you may well write the entire first draft of your book first, before you ever think much about backstory or motivation. If you’re a Snowflaker or an outliner, then you probably enjoy developing backstory and motivation first, so that your first draft will be as close as possible to your last draft. Whatever works for you is fine, but do the work!
In the next section, we ask you to psychoanalyze your character and probe his motivations more deeply.

Psychoanalyzing Your Characters

The biggest problem writers have with characters’ motivations is not giving them any. The main solution is to make a conscious effort to name the following core pieces of motivation for each main character (which we introduce in Chapter 7):

  ✓ Values: What are the core truths for your character? You can have several of these.

  ✓ Ambition: What one abstract thing does your character want most in the world?

  ✓ Story goal: What one concrete thing does your character believe she needs to do or have or become in order to achieve her ambition?
If you have these worked out for your characters, that’s great! Then your goal in editing is to make them better to deepen your character, sharpen the conflict of the story, and make it all reasonable to your reader. This section can help you do so.

Are values in conflict?

  Every character has values, and great stories thrive on conflicts between values. Values are core truths — things your character believes to be true without examining them. When your main character’s core truths are in conflict, then he can’t be predictable, and neither can your story.
Consider two conflicting values of Don Corleone, the Mafia leader in Mario Puzo’s The Godfather:

  ✓ “Nothing is more important than respect.”

  ✓ “Nothing is more important than family.”

Don Corleone’s troubles begin when a rising young Mafioso comes to him with a proposal for a joint venture in narcotics. Corleone believes that this sort of crime is bad business, and he’ll have nothing to do with it. But Sonny, the oldest son of Don Corleone, exposes his interest in the matter by questioning his father’s judgment in front of the drug-dealing Mafioso, an act of blatant disrespect. Afterward, Don Corleone reprimands his son, but he doesn’t oust him. His love of family has come into conflict with his need for respect.
It’s a fatal mistake. The spurned Mafioso, sensing weakness, tries to assassinate Don Corleone so he can negotiate a deal with Sonny. This leads to a terrible war of attrition between the Corleones and the Five Families of New York.
  As you read your story, ask whether the values of your lead character are in conflict. If not, can you revise them to be in conflict? Can you add a new value that will conflict with the existing ones?

Do the values make sense from the backstory?

Your characters generally can’t give any reasons for their values. A value is a truth so sacred, so true, that it simply can’t be explained. If a character can explain his values, then you haven’t taken him far enough — some core truths beneath those values explain them. In that case, those underlying core truths are his real values.
  You are not your character. You are the god of the universe that you’re creating as your story world. You are omniscient, and you can explain your character’s values — at least to some degree — from his backstory. Somewhere in the half-remembered mists of time lie the reasons for your character’s values. 

Searching for the source of Don Corleone’s values

Why does Don Corleone value respect so much? Why does he call himself a “man of respect”? He can give no reason, because it’s obvious to him. But the answer is that Don Corleone is a Sicilian, raised in an honor culture. In such a culture, honor is worth more than money. Corleone’s criminal enterprises in the U.S. depend critically on holding the respect of his friends and his enemies.
Why does Don Corleone value family so much? Again, it’s part of his Sicilian culture. Blood loyalty is everything; no explanation is needed. None is possible, and Don Corleone would be astonished that anyone would ask for one.

But not all Sicilians become Mafia dons. What explains Don Corleone’s rise to power as the head of one of the most vicious crime families in the country? Don Corleone holds another value that we haven’t discussed yet: “A man is responsible to use power in every possible way to benefit his family and those who respect him.”
This value becomes clear in the first chapter of The Godfather, when Don Corleone receives four different visitors on the wedding day of his daughter. Each visitor needs something from him, but his responses to each one show his values clearly. Those who have a history of showing respect to Corleone get what they want; those who don’t have such a history must learn respect first and then reap the benefits of knowing the Godfather.
Where did Don Corleone develop this value? Readers don’t discover the answer until a number of chapters into the book, when Mario Puzo provides a number of pages of the backstory, showing how a quiet, humble Sicilian young man transformed into the powerful Godfather by a series of choices that he made in a world that treats quiet, humble Sicilian young men with contempt and injustice. By the end of this long backstory sequence, the reader still doesn’t consider Don Corleone a moral man. However, the reader understands how Corleone justifies his actions to himself.

Making sense of your characters’ values

Some of your characters will inherit cultural values; others will create their values based on early life experiences. You should be able to give some justification for each value; however, don’t expect to be able to make an ironclad case that these “core truths” are in fact true. Values are intensely personal and by their nature can’t be proven. The best you can do is to make a reasonable case that your character’s values make sense to him, given his culture, personality, genetic traits, and life experiences. That’s all you need.

  As you read through your manuscript, ask the following questions:

  ✓ Do the values of your characters make sense to you? Even if you don’t agree with those values, can you understand how your characters came to believe them?

  ✓ If the values don’t make sense, then can you find a way for each character to justify the values that currently seem implausible?

  ✓ If your justification for any of the values seems weak, can you strengthen it? If you can’t, then those values are broken and you need to come up with something more plausible, because your reader isn’t going to believe that anyone would hold those values.

Every character thinks he’s the hero of the story; no character believes he’s evil incarnate. Characters justify their behavior by their values, core truths that they consider “obviously true.” The more likely your reader is to reject your character’s values, the more you need to work to show a backstory that explains how those values came to exist. Your reader must believe that your character believes his values to be absolutely true — that’s the secret to creating three-dimensional characters.

Does ambition follow from values?

Each character has an ambition — one abstract thing that he wants more than anything else in life. Some characters know this early in their story; others only gradually develop an ambition. Regardless, that ambition needs to spring from the character’s values.
The Godfather is the story of how Michael Corleone, the youngest son of Don Corleone, develops an ambition to be like his father. At the beginning of the story, that seems like an unlikely ambition for Michael. The year is 1945, and he’s a clean-cut Army veteran and college boy who has apparently renounced his family’s criminal connections and has a non-Italian girlfriend who thinks he’s kidding when he talks about his father’s dark past.
Yet Michael Corleone is made of the same steel as his father, with the same ferocious will and the same icy control over his emotions. He shares his father’s values — family ties and respect — without being able to explain them any better than his father can. When Don Corleone is critically wounded by a rival Mafioso, it’s Michael Corleone, the white sheep of the family, who volunteers to kill the man who ordered the hit. This is Michael’s first step toward an ambition he only dimly realizes — to be a man like his father.
That ambition arises directly from Michael’s values. Until his father was shot, Michael could afford to distance himself from the family business. But Michael can’t simply walk away without avenging this hit. He can’t. His blood ties demand it. Having decided to take vengeance, Michael chooses to do it in a way that earns him respect, even from his older brothers and his father’s tough caporegimes. Michael has other options, but none of them would command respect. Michael is more his father’s son than he knew.
  As you read through your story, ask whether you’ve defined an ambition for each of your main characters. Does that ambition spring directly from at least one of the character’s values? If not, you have two options:

  ✓ Find a new value to give your character that will explain this ambition.

  ✓ Change the ambition to be in line with the character’s values.

Will the story goal satisfy the ambition?

Every lead character needs a story goal — a concrete wish to get something, achieve something, or become something. Until your primary character has a story goal, you have no story; you have only a set of incidents that mean nothing to the reader. After you have a story goal, your reader invests in the story. 

You’ve set the hook: Will the lead character reach his story goal or not?

A story goal must be objective, simple, important, achievable, and difficult (see Chapter 7 for details). But in the editing stage, you need to verify one other thing: Would reaching the story goal actually achieve your lead character’s ambition? If not, then that’s a problem.

Achieving Michael Corleone’s ambition

In The Godfather, Michael Corleone feels impelled to kill the man who ordered the hit on his father, along with the dirty police captain who’s in league with him. Corleone shoots them in a restaurant where the three have met to negotiate a peace. Twenty minutes later, he’s on a boat headed for Sicily, where he’ll lie low until the heat dies down.
That ends Act 1, and it’s a disaster for Michael. He had planned to marry his WASP (white Anglo-Saxon Protestant) girlfriend and settle down to an ordinary life outside the shadow of his family’s criminal ventures. Now he’s banished to hide out in Sicily, and his story goal is apparently very simple: to come home. 
However, it’s more complicated than that. Yes, Michael wants to come home, but come home as what? Michael knows, and the reader knows, that Michael can never come home and resume his former life as a law-abiding citizen. Michael Corleone is a murderer, with a death sentence over his head from five rival Mafia families. He’s a cop-killer with a long prison sentence awaiting him, courtesy of the American justice system.
If Michael Corleone comes home again, he’ll need the help of his father and family and the alternative system of power that they maintain. Michael Corleone can never come home clean. He’ll have to come home as a member of the Corleone syndicate or not at all. By virtue of his bloodline, he’ll be in competition with his two older brothers. Who will become the new Godfather when Don Corleone eventually retires or dies? If Michael Corleone comes home, he has no choice but to aim for that position. He’s the smartest of the three sons, but is he the toughest? After showing his strong moralistic leanings early, can Michael come home as the new Godfather? That’s the story question that carries the story for the rest of the book.
Michael Corleone’s ambition is to become a man like his father, an ambition that he could achieve in many ways. But the path he chooses is to become his father.
