Think hard about how to fix a scene before you declare it dead. Only if the scene is an incorrigible, hopeless drain on your story should you kill it. Consider the following questions to help you decide whether you can fix the problem:

  ✓ What changed in the scene? If nothing changed, and if there’s no chance of anything changing, then this scene is in big, big trouble. Why would you have a scene in which nothing changes? We’re going to guess you put it in there to feed a big lump of backstory to your reader. If so, do you really need all that backstory? Is it necessary in order to drive the story, or is it merely information that your reader could live without?

  ✓ Does the scene offer new information to your characters, or is it just new to your readers? If it’s not new to your characters, then look for a way to make it new and interesting to at least one of them:

•Can you find a way to turn that new information into bad news for a character? If so, that’s a setback, which is a terrific way to end a proactive scene.

•Is there a way to use that new information to help a character move toward her story goal? If so, that’s a decision, which is a terrific way to end a reactive scene.

✓ Does the scene end with either a setback or a decision? If not, then the scene fits neither of the standard patterns — proactive scenes or reactive scenes. That’s probably why you feel it isn’t working. Can you imagine a way to add either a setback or a decision at the end of the scene? Would that amp up the emotional effect of the scene?

If a scene looks fixable, see the upcoming sections “Fixing Proactive Scenes” and “Fixing Reactive Scenes” for some guidance on strengthening your scene. If you can’t find a way to introduce change into your scene, preferably as either a setback or a decision, you may have to kill the scene. We discuss unfixable scenes later in “Killing an Incurable Scene.”

Fixing Proactive Scenes

  A proactive scene needs to involve a goal, a conflict, and a setback. Ask yourself the following questions to find ways to strengthen a proactive scene:

  ✓ Do you clearly define a goal at the beginning of the scene? Is the goal simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult (see Chapter 9 for details on these criteria)? If it fails in any of these, can you find a way to make it so?

  ✓ Is the main part of the scene directed toward achieving that goal? Does the POV character meet resistance? Every proactive scene needs conflict — repeated steps toward the goal, with each attempt hitting resistance. Is the resistance in your scene weak, making the scene boring? Does your character get what he wants too easily? Can you think of ways to firm up the resistance? Can you make life tougher for your POV character?

   Is the length of the scene appropriate to its importance? Should you shorten it or lengthen it?

  ✓ Does your scene end in a strong setback? Is the setback a complete reversal of the goal? Does it leave the POV character in a worse situation than if he’d never pursued that goal in the first place? Can you tweak your goal for this scene so that the setback fits it better?

In this section, we start with a flawed example scene and show you how asking diagnostic questions can help you fix a proactive scene.

Imagining a proactive scene:  

The Day of the Jackal

The example we take is a hypothetical proactive scene set early in the thriller The Day of the Jackal, by Frederick Forsyth. (We know, of course, that Forsyth based his actual scene on a real historical event, so we aren’t trying to reconstruct how he actually came to write his scene; our purpose here is to show how you can take a weak, spineless scene and give it bones and muscle by asking the right questions.)

Here, in summary form, is how our imaginary flawed version of this scene runs: A dozen Frenchmen are standing beside a busy street in Paris on August 22, 1962. It’s a bit past 8 p.m. and dusk has fallen. Visibility is poor, but the roar of two Citroën cars and several police motorcycles catches the attention of the characters. They turn and see the motorcade of President Charles de Gaulle flash past.
The men beside the road are angry when they see de Gaulle. All of them are veterans of the Algerian War, and all feel betrayed by de Gaulle’s violation of his campaign promises to keep Algeria. They spend a few minutes cursing de Gaulle’s name and then head off to the local tavern to drown their sorrows  in beer.

Checking for change

What’s wrong with the structure of the hypothetical scene in the preceding section? Everything! Nothing changes here. Our characters are neither better off nor worse off at the end of the scene. The 12 Frenchmen hate de Gaulle at the beginning of the scene, and they hate him at the end.The reason nothing changes is that our characters come into the scene without any particular goal. Because they have no goal, they do nothing about their rage, other than vent a few curses. Although this may be the way you’d behave toward some hated political figure, it makes terrible fiction. Nothing happens. This scene doesn’t work.
You may complain that no writer would ever write a scene like this. Surely a writer has some purpose going into every scene, right? The answer is no, not always. For many writers, the joy of fiction is discovering where the story is going as they write it. If they don’t get it right on the first draft, then they need to fix it in the editing stage.
How can we make our hypothetical scene work? We’ll consider our diagnostic questions and see whether we can improve it.

Choosing a powerful goal

For a proactive scene, first consider the characters’ goal. Is a goal clearly defined at the beginning of the scene? Is that goal simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult? If not, can you make it so?

Our characters don’t have any goal at the beginning of the example scene, but we can easily give them one. What goal might these gentlemen choose? To shake their fists at a motorcade? To yell insults at a man who can’t hear them? No and no. Those are insignificant goals, unworthy of our attention. We need to give them a big goal, the biggest we can imagine. Shoot for the moon here. The goal we’ll give them is to assassinate Charles de Gaulle. This is pretty extreme, but our characters are men of strong passions. Extreme goals make good thrillers. Now check to see whether this goal meets our requirements:

  ✓ Is it simple? Yes. Simple means that explaining the goal is simple. The reader needs no complex proofs that a bullet to the brain will kill a man.

  ✓ Is it objective? Yes. At the end of the scene, de Gaulle will be either dead or alive. Any observer will be able to tell whether he is or isn’t.

  ✓ Is it worthwhile? Yes, in the minds of our characters. This is a key point.
   Your reader doesn’t need to believe that the goal is worthwhile; the reader only needs to believe that your characters think the goal is worthwhile.

  ✓ Is it achievable? Yes. Charles de Gaulle is mortal. Shoot him enough times, and he’ll die. Note: You may argue that this isn’t achievable, because the reader knows that de Gaulle wasn’t assassinated in 1962. True, but the reader is always willing to suspend disbelief and consider an alternate history of events.
  ✓ Is it difficult to achieve? Yes. The French security forces are well-trained, tough, and disciplined. Getting to de Gaulle is not going to be as easy as a tiptoe through the Tuileries.
As a result of setting up a clearly defined goal, the scene must become a bit longer. The beginning of the scene won’t merely show the men standing on a street corner doing nothing; it’ll show them moving into position according to a plan they’ve spent months rehearsing.

Stretching out the conflict

Suppose we’ve rewritten our hypothetical scene with a new and improved goal as follows: Our intended assassins wait for de Gaulle’s motorcade to come by. They’ve planned everything meticulously. They have a lookout on station to signal them when de Gaulle’s Citroën is getting close. They have a team of riflemen on foot to stop de Gaulle’s car in a barrage of bullets. They have other men ready to swoop in by car to administer the coup de grâce. They have getaway cars and an exit strategy. The plan goes off perfectly. The men kill de Gaulle and then stroll away to the nearest tavern, where their joyful countrymen buy them drinks until the wee hours.

What’s wrong with this scene? From a structural point of view, the gaping problem is that there’s no conflict. Take a look at our diagnostic questions: Does the POV character meet resistance? Is it too easy for your character to get what he wants? Can you make life tougher for your POV character? This scene has gone far too easily for our assassins. The solution is simple: We need to make the plan go awry. The killers have made meticulous plans, but even so, something must go wrong. Then more things have to go wrong, and more. Conflict needs to go on and on until the scene is over. Our characters won’t face just one obstacle; they’ll face several.
Say we design some conflict into this scene. First, the assassins fail to anticipate how dark it’ll be when de Gaulle’s car arrives at their killing zone. Their lookout fails to see the motorcade approaching in the dusk until it’s passing by, so he fails to send the signal.
That’s an obstacle, but it’s not enough. Our characters don’t slink away when things get tough. Even though they’ve missed the signal and are caught unprepared, the instant they see de Gaulle’s car, they begin firing anyway, taking as many shots as they can while the motorcade flashes past. They’re marksmen, and some of their bullets hit the car and shred the tires.
That’s conflict, but it’s still not enough. French security forces don’t take all those bullets lying down. De Gaulle’s driver takes evasive action as he’s trained to do. His bodyguards begin shooting back. On and on the action goes, as each side makes desperate moves. The second team of killers in cars takes their shots at de Gaulle. His driver evades again, while the security men fight back. We show all this conflict detail, instant by instant as it unfolds.

Desperately seeking setbacks

Say that we’ve rewritten our hypothetical scene as we detail in the two  preceding sections: Our dozen assassins have made a careful plan to kill Charles de Gaulle. However, they’ve failed to take account of the timing for dusk, so they’re caught unprepared. They fire anyway, shredding the tires of the presidential car. French security forces fire back, and a massive gun battle follows. De Gaulle’s car is disabled and rolls to a halt. The leader of  the assassination team fires his last bullet and kills de Gaulle.
Now what’s wrong with this scene? The structural problem is that our characters get what they want. Nothing could make them happier than what they achieve, so the novel is over on page 10. Does that strike you as a wee bit early?

Look over our diagnostic questions: Does your scene end in a strong setback? Is the setback a complete reversal of the goal? Does it leave the POV character in a worse situation than if he’d never pursued that goal in the first place?
  Early in the story, characters don’t need a victory; they need a setback. They need a major failure. They need a reason to come back and fight again in the next chapter, and the next, and the next, all the way to the end of the book. 

Early successes make dull stories. Early setbacks make exciting ones.

The solution is to have de Gaulle survive this attempt but also to let the assassins escape in the confusion, furious at themselves and determined to do better next time. That’s a complete reversal of their goal. They’re worse off than they were at the beginning of the scene, because now French security is after them with all its fury. The intended assassins are now men on the run.

Examining the final result

Here’s how the scene actually plays out in the novel: The assassins have a lookout posted 100 yards up the avenue to signal them by waving a newspaper when de Gaulle’s Citroën DS approaches. That should give the gunmen several seconds to concentrate their firepower on the car.
The flaw in their plan comes when they consult the table for dusk for the previous year, 1961, rather than for the current year, 1962. In 1961, dusk on August 22 fell at 8:35 p.m. But in 1962, it falls 25 minutes earlier, at 8:10 p.m. (Forsyth doesn’t explain the astronomical reason for this apparently impossible event, but it appears that few readers have ever challenged it.)
As the scene plays out, de Gaulle’s car approaches at 8:18 p.m. The lookout signals as it speeds by, but he’s almost invisible to the gunmen 100 yards down the avenue. They see de Gaulle just as he races past and they rush a few shots at the retreating Citroën, blowing out its tires, shattering its windows, and missing the presidential nose by inches but failing to disable the car or even wing the General. The second mobile team of killers then engages de Gaulle’s security forces in a high-speed gun battle, but they also fail. The motorcade reaches the airport safely and de Gaulle sneers, “They can’t shoot straight.”
The mission has failed, and now the assassins are on the run and French security is forewarned and doubly cautious. That’s a setback that sets up the entire novel that follows.
Frederick Forsyth didn’t develop his scene they way we’ve sketched it out, because he based it on an actual assassination attempt. But if he hadn’t had a historical event to work from, he still could’ve developed it from a lame scene like the one we began with — simply by asking the right questions.

Fixing Reactive Scenes

  A reactive scene contains a reaction, a dilemma, and a decision. Ask the following diagnostic questions to help you nurse reactive scenes to health:

  ✓ Does the scene begin with a reaction appropriate to the setback from a previous scene? Is it emotive and visceral? Is the reaction reasonable, given the POV character’s emotional state and personality type? Does it run too long or too short?

  ✓ Do you segue from the reaction to a dilemma that gives the POV character no good options? Is the dilemma appropriately difficult for the scene you’re writing — neither too easy nor too hard? Is there some obvious solution kicking around that your character is too dense to see? Have you boxed in your character well enough? Does the character spend the appropriate amount of time trying to solve the problem?

  ✓ Does your character come to a decision at the end? Is the decision simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult? Will your reader respect your character’s decision? Will your reader feel compelled to turn the page to see whether the character can execute that decision?In this section, we imagine a hypothetical reactive scene that doesn’t work and change it by stages to make it work.

Imagining a reactive scene: Outlander

We take inspiration for our example reactive scene from the time-travel romance novel Outlander, by Diana Gabaldon. The scene is set roughly a quarter of the way into the book, and it forms the end of Act 1 in the novel’s three-act structure, so we first need to talk about the story setup.
It’s late 1945. World War II is over, and the heroine, Claire Randall, is an English nurse getting reacquainted with her husband Frank after several years of wartime separation. While visiting Scotland with Frank, Claire accidentally passes through a time portal and finds herself in 1743 Scotland with no way to get back. The clan MacKenzie takes her in, but they suspect her of being an English spy. When Claire’s been there about a month, the local English captain “Black Jack” Randall (an ancestor of Claire’s husband Frank) interrogates her and disbelieves the lies she tells him about where she came from. Captain Randall ends the interview by slugging Claire in the belly and ordering her Scottish friends to deliver her into his custody on the following Monday for further questioning. This is the setback that Claire must now recover from. It’s a major setback — it’s the first disaster in the book’s three-disaster structure.

How should we follow this disaster? Before we tell you how Diana Gabaldon did it, we imagine a poorly structured reactive scene that runs as follows: Claire has a chat with Dougal MacKenzie, one of the clan chieftains, and his nephew Jamie Fraser, a swashbuckling young giant whom Claire has a crush on. They agree that it’s rotten luck that she’ll have to turn herself in on Monday, but because they can’t do anything about it, Claire and Jamie might as well get drunk and then retire to a private place for the smooching scene that every romance novel needs.

Checking for change (again)

What’s wrong with the reactive scene in the preceding section? It’s horrible. Nothing has changed by the end of the scene. Claire is in mortal danger at the beginning, and she’s still in mortal danger at the end.The reason nothing changes is that Claire doesn’t seem to care. She doesn’t react at all after being slugged, and she doesn’t worry about her future. Because Claire doesn’t seem to want change, she doesn’t pursue it, and therefore nothing happens. You may know some people who’d give up in that kind of situation and go get drunk with their friends, but our fictional characters need to be tougher than that. In fiction, characters need to fight back. The scene as we’ve described it doesn’t work.
You may argue that nobody would ever write such a weak scene. Yes, they would. Writers write weak scenes all the time — but remember that writing a weak scene is often just a stepping stone to writing a strong one. The solution is to ask the right questions and then use the answers to strengthen the scene. We show you how in the following sections.

Fitting the reaction to the setback

Start with the diagnostic questions about the reaction part of the reactive scene: Does the scene begin with a reaction appropriate to the setback from a previous scene? Is it emotive and visceral? Is the reaction reasonable, given the POV character’s emotional state and personality type? Does it run too long or too short?
In our hypothetical scene, Claire doesn’t seem to feel any pain or any emotion after being slugged in the stomach. That’s not appropriate. We’re going to give her time to feel the pain; give her time to let the shock run through her and then out of her; give her time to burn with rage at her attacker, chew herself out for her helplessness. She’ll take time to feel.

Claire would seem like a weakling if we drag this out too long, but she’d seem inhuman if we cut this reaction short. We’ll set the length of the reaction to fit its importance. We’ll let her work through the pain, and then she’ll be ready for the next phase of the scene.

Working through the dilemma

Say we’ve added an appropriate reaction to our hypothetical scene, which now runs like this: For a few minutes, Claire can hardly breathe because of the pain in her belly. She thinks she may throw up, and her mind feels numb at the thought that a man who looks like her husband could be so evil. Then she has a chat with Dougal MacKenzie and his nephew Jamie Fraser. They agree that it’s rotten luck that she’ll have to turn herself in on Monday, but because they can’t do anything about it, Claire and Jamie might as well get drunk and then retire to a private place for the smooching scene that every romance novel needs.
This is slightly better than our first cut at the scene, but it’s still wretchedly unrealistic. The structure is still weak. Claire has now worked through the pain from the past scene, but she doesn’t seem to worry about her future.
Look at our next set of diagnostic questions: Do you segue from the reaction to a dilemma that gives the POV character no good options? Is the dilemma appropriately difficult? Is there some obvious solution kicking around that your character is too dense to see? Have you boxed in your character well enough? Does the character spend the appropriate amount of time trying to solve the problem?
We need Claire to face up to her problems by working through her options in detail. They’re bad options, all of them, but Claire must spend some time talking or thinking about them to convince the reader that she’s truly boxed in.
For starters, Jack Randall doesn’t trust her, and if she turns herself in to him next Monday, then he could do anything — flog her, rape her, hang her. Given Randall’s horrible reputation, these are not only possible; they’re likely. Turning herself in is a terrible idea.
What else can Claire try? Can she run? Not a chance. The English soldiers control the roads. Furthermore, she’s not free to leave the Scottish men she’s traveling with, because they still suspect her of being an English spy. Everybody suspects Claire, and the only person who really likes her is Jamie.
Jamie’s uncle Dougal finally hits on a terrific idea that will solve all their problems. If Claire marries Jamie, then she’ll no longer be subject to English law. Instead, she’ll be a Scot and therefore under the control of the local laird.

The marriage will also make it impossible for Jamie ever to usurp his uncle’s place as laird, because the MacKenzie clan would never accept a leader with an English-born wife. This plan solves everybody’s problems, but for Claire, it’s a terrible idea. She likes Jamie, to be sure. She’s even attracted to him. But she’s married, and she’s the kind of person who takes her marriage vows seriously. Her husband is still in 1945, and she hopes to get back to him through the time portal as soon as possible. Claire can’t possibly marry Jamie.

Coming to a decision

Given the revisions in the preceding sections, our scene is coming along reasonably well, with a strong reaction and a sharp dilemma that we can summarize this way: For a few minutes, Claire can hardly breathe because of the pain in her belly. She thinks she may throw up, and her mind feels numb at the thought that a man who looks like her husband could be so evil. Now she needs to figure out what to do next Monday. She can’t turn herself in to Captain Randall — he might kill her. She can’t escape — the English control the roads. She can’t take Dougal’s advice and marry Jamie — she’s already married to a man she loves. Unable to decide, she spends the weekend in a drunken stupor, smooching with Jamie.
What’s wrong with this? The structural problem is the fact that Claire can’t stop dithering, so this dilemma is never going to end.
Look at our diagnostic questions: Does your character come to a decision at the end? Is the decision simple, objective, worthwhile, achievable, and difficult? Will your reader respect your character’s decision? Will your reader feel compelled to turn the page to see whether the character can execute that decision?
Claire needs to decide, which means taking her least-bad option. That turns out to be marrying Jamie. This decision fits all our criteria. Getting married is both simple and objective. Is it worthwhile? Yes, Jamie’s one hot guy, and Claire already has a crush on him. Is it achievable? Yes, because Jamie’s  willing and a parson is available. Is it difficult? Yes, because Claire is married already — to a man who isn’t born yet — but she’s still committed to him.

Coming to the final result

Here’s how the reactive scene actually works in Outlander: After Captain Randall slugs Claire in the stomach, she spends several paragraphs feeling her pain and recovering from the shock to her system. Jamie’s uncle Dougal confronts Captain Randall in his office and vents his outrage, but Claire can’t hear the details.

When Dougal finishes ranting at Randall, he escorts Claire out of the fort and takes her to a sulfurous spring known as the liar’s spring because a local legend says that anyone who drinks from it and then tells a lie will have her gizzard burned out. After Claire drinks, Dougal questions her and confirms in his own mind that she’s no English spy. He still has no idea who she is or where she came from, but he’s convinced that he can let her into the clan by marrying Jamie.
Dougal then tells Claire in excruciating detail the story of how Captain Randall flogged Jamie a few years ago — twice in one week — nearly killing him. Dougal lays it on thick, making it clear that Randall is far worse than Claire had imagined and that Jamie has incredible courage.
Why has Dougal told her all this? He wants to impress on Claire just how evil Captain Randall is and also what an excellent man Jamie is. Then Dougal tells her that he’s decided she must marry Jamie. She protests, of course, and puts up quite a lot of opposition, but turning herself in to Randall would be too horrible to imagine. Jamie is a strong, courageous, and kind man who’ll protect Claire with his life.
The reader, by this point, is desperately hoping she’ll agree. Claire continues to protest, looking for any way out. She runs through every argument she can, first with Dougal, then with herself. Finally, she demands to talk to Jamie, who has no qualms at all about marrying her. Slowly, her resistance wears down and she finally realizes she has no choice. She’s going to marry Jamie. This is the decision that commits Claire to the rest of the story.

Killing an Incurable Scene

A weak scene can become a strong scene if you just ask the right questions and then use the answers to find ways to improve it, as we show you in the preceding sections. Some scenes, however, just don’t pull through, despite your best efforts.
  Every scene needs to pull its own weight by advancing your story. Every scene is a mini-story that must give your reader a powerful emotional experience. Every scene. No exceptions.
If you have a scene that simply can’t be helped, then you already know you should kill it — you probably just don’t want to. You feel that this scene is your baby. You labored over those words. You sweated blood to create that scene. Now you should kill it just because it isn’t doing its job?

If you’re struggling with this idea, you’re being shackled by the wrong  metaphor. Scenes are not your babies; scenes aren’t people at all. Scenes are records of conflict in your story. That’s it — just records. They’re black ink on white paper. Bits on a hard drive. Inert matter.
We don’t recommend that you delete any scene, of course. It’ll be there on your computer for all eternity, sitting in your previous draft, should you ever need to go look it up. When you kill a scene, all you’re doing is refusing to pull it forward into your next draft. That scene is deadwood, a failed idea that’s now sucking the life out of your story. Leave it behind.
  If losing a scene leaves a small gap in your story, then make a note for yourself to salvage whatever bits of it you need. If you were using the scene to give the reader some necessary information, then find some other scene that works and wedge in the information there. 
Don’t waste your emotional energy grieving for scenes that can’t be fixed. You need that energy for injecting new emotive life into the scenes that can.


}
{

Chapter 15

Editing Your Scenes for Content

In This Chapter

Deciding whether to show or tell

Editing clips

Following special notes on flashbacks

Editing telling

In this chapter, we focus on the one editing task that’s most important in creating a powerful emotional experience: editing your scenes to improve both your showing and telling. (See Chapter 10 for a discussion of showing and telling.)
Editors often advise writers to “show, don’t tell.” That’s especially good advice for beginning writers, who tend to show far too little and tell far too much. The problem is that intermediate writers sometimes show too much and tell too little. You need to strike the right balance, showing your story well during the high-intensity parts and telling the story well when you need to compress time or pass along important information to your reader.
  Here’s the secret of showing: Write each scene as a sequence of clips — the smallest unit of conflict in fiction. Clips are made up of action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and sensory description. (See Chapter 10 for an introduction to clips.) If editors tell you that you aren’t showing enough, then discipline yourself to write in clips and to edit them the way we show you in this chapter.
There isn’t any such simple secret for telling. You have a variety of ways to tell: Narrative summary, exposition, and static description all qualify. These are all potent tools in the hands of a skilled writer, but giving you rules on how best to use them is extremely difficult. However, we do give you some guidelines on telling and how to edit your segments of telling.

Deciding Whether to Show or Tell

  Showing can be high on emotive force, but it’s usually low on information content. Telling rarely carries much emotional punch, but it can efficiently pass on information. You need to use whatever works best.Edit your scene sentence by sentence, keeping the following questions in mind:

  ✓ Is the sentence showing or telling?

  ✓ How much emotive punch do you need for this sentence? How much emotive punch does it pack?

  ✓ Is the sentence helping to move the story forward?

  ✓ How much information do you need in this sentence? How much information does it carry?

In this section, we help you take the answers to these questions and decide how best to present your story. We then work through an example that shows how to apply our guidelines for showing and telling.
  You won’t always make the decision to switch a segment from telling to showing; sometimes, telling just makes more sense. But whether you decide to show or tell, you should know the reason for your decision. As you edit each sentence and paragraph of each scene, weigh your options and switch if you need to.

Knowing when clips, flashbacks, or telling techniques are most appropriate

In this section, we provide some practical guidelines to help you decide whether to show something using clips or flashback or whether to tell it using narrative summary and similar tools.

When to use clips

  Use clips whenever all of the following are true (which should be most of the time):

  ✓ Whatever is happening is going on right now.

  ✓ Something emotively important is happening in your scene. If it’s a proactive scene, this means that your lead character is defining his goal, facing down conflict, or experiencing a setback. If it’s a reactive scene, it means that your lead character is having an emotive reaction, working through a dilemma, or reaching a decision. (For more on scene types, see Chapters 9 and 14.)

When to use flashback

  Use a flashback when all of the following statements are true:

  ✓ Something emotively important happened in your lead character’s backstory, and your reader needs to know about it right now.

  ✓ You can’t reveal the events in clips (in the present) using dialogue or interior monologue or some combination of them.

  ✓ You can insert the flashback without breaking the tension in the present story.

Remember that a flashback is a container for a series of clips set in the past. The flashback needs to have a transition at each end to take the reader back in time and then bring her forward again.

When to tell

  Tell your story — using narrative summary, exposition, or static description — when

  ✓ You need to pass on some information that doesn’t move the story forward, but it’s essential for your reader to know. That info may be about the story world or a character’s backstory or some mundane events that bear on the story. (If the information isn’t essential, cut it altogether; see the later section “Knowing when to kill a segment of telling” for details.)

  ✓ You need to show a transition from one time to another or one place to another.

  ✓ You want to compress time, express a value judgment, or speed up actions that you don’t need to show in detail.

  ✓ The information has little emotive impact.

  ✓ Showing the information using clips would take too long or be too boring or tedious.

Following an example of decision-making

We now apply the show-and-tell guidelines in the preceding section to an example paragraph. Here’s the paragraph we want to edit:
You’re at your first book signing, and you’re nervous because you’re going to have to speak to a crowd of strangers. To get your mind off your fears, you start thinking about the reason you wrote your book in the first place. After 9/11, you used to have nightmares about it. Gradually, you got to wondering what might’ve happened if you’d had those nightmares before the tragedy. Could you have prevented it? You like to think that you could have. That’s what prompted the idea for your first novel.

That paragraph is all telling, and it’s pretty dull. Part of it is happening right now. Part of it is backstory. Does the paragraph carry any emotive punch? Not much. Does it need to? Yes, because we intend this to be the beginning of a fairly high-action scene that we want to continue developing through this chapter.
Our first goal is to tap into some emotion. The obvious choice is the anxiety that the lead character is feeling. We need to dramatize that, and the best way is to use some interior emotion and possibly some interior monologue.
Our other goal is to show some of that backstory, because it’s important for the rest of the scene that we’re developing. Can we use flashback? No, that’s a bad idea at the start of a scene. Can we use either dialogue or interior monologue? Yes. Which should we use? Dialogue is often better, as long as we don’t have one character telling another what they both know and as long as it advances the story. In this example, the lead character is about to speak to a crowd of people who are intensely interested in the author’s backstory, so we have a good reason to mention the past. Furthermore, we can make this backstory lead immediately into conflict.
Now we rewrite the paragraph, expanding it into three paragraphs. We could choose any number of styles, but we’ve chosen a style appropriate for an action novel, because it lets us illustrate our main points clearly:
You’re at your first book signing. Hands slick with sweat, you barely hear the store’s PR director introducing you. Your heart is thumping in your chest at warp speed and your ears are ringing. Applause from the crowd cuts through the curtain of fear that surrounds you. It’s show time, whether you’re ready or not. You stand up and wobble toward the lectern.
You take a last swig of cold water, inhale deeply, and smile at the crowd. “For years after 9/11, I used to dream about what happened,” you say. “Then one day, I got to wondering what it would’ve been like if I’d had those dreams before 9/11. What if I’d suspected something was coming . . . but did nothing? What if I had to live with the guilt of wondering if I could’ve changed things? What if I began having dreams about some new impending disaster? What would I do?”
“Bullshit!” bellows a voice from the back of the crowd.
Now consider what we’ve done in this revision. We’ve expanded from one paragraph to three. Ending up with extra text is common when you switch from telling to showing, because showing is less efficient. Here’s how the new passage breaks down:

  ✓ Paragraph one

•We trimmed the first sentence, though it still tells rather than shows. Why tell here? Why not use a more vivid sentence? We could’ve used some evocative, sensory description, but we chose to establish the setting quickly and get straight to the emotive part.

•The second and third sentences give the reader three hits of interior emotion — physiological reactions that show the POV character’s feelings. We aren’t going for subtlety here. We’re showing sweaty hands, a thumping heart, and ringing ears.

•The next sentence shows applause and tells about fear. It’s not a strong sentence. We’re lowering the intensity with this sentence because it’s important to vary the intensity within a scene.

•The next sentence is indirect interior monologue — a cliché about its being show time. The cliché works here because that’s how the POV character thinks.

•The last sentence is action — the character stands and wobbles.	

Again, we’re not trying to be subtle here. Wobble is a strong verb.
   By the end of the first paragraph, the POV character already has a clear goal for the scene: to conquer the anxiety of a first book-signing speech.

  ✓ Paragraph two

•The next paragraph begins with three actions that all show the POV character trying to get a grip: sipping water, breathing deeply, and smiling. We don’t need to tell the reader that the POV character is battling anxiety. The actions say so.

•The rest of the second paragraph is all dialogue, spoken by the POV character. It’s filling in some backstory, which is fine here because the audience at the bookstore doesn’t know this information but is definitely interested in hearing it.
   The first two paragraphs make up one long private clip (see Chapter 10 for a full explanation of this term). A private clip focuses on the POV character.

  ✓ Paragraph three

•The last paragraph is a public clip — it switches focus to a non-POV character.

•This sliver of dialogue also introduces more conflict into the scene.	

Now the POV character not only has anxiety to deal with but also some unknown antagonist. The stakes for this scene have gone up.

A Good Show: Editing Clips

If you’ve decided that a given segment of your scene needs to be showing rather than telling, then the first thing to do is to make sure the segment uses clips. You write clips using the five basic tools for showing: action, dialogue, interior emotion, interior monologue, and sensory description. (See Chapter 10 for a full explanation of how to combine these basic tools into the two kinds of clips, public and private.)
If you have a segment composed of clips, you still may have some editing work to do. Here are the most common problems we see in clips:

  ✓ Paragraphs don’t focus on a single character. This is a problem because a paragraph should be as unified as possible.

  ✓ The scene has more than one POV character. Unless you intended to write in head-hopping or omniscient POV, this is a problem.

  ✓ The reader sees things that the POV character can’t. This is a problem unless you intended to write in third person objective or omniscient POV.

  ✓ The reader sees the cause after the effect. This can disorient the reader, because in the real world, causes happen before effects.

  ✓ The time scales are muddled so that slow processes finish before fast ones. This can disorient the reader.

In this section, we give some guidelines to help you fix these problems, and we show you examples of each solution. 
You’ll bend these clips-editing guidelines often and violate them on  occasion — when it works to do so. But we encourage you to test everything you write against these guidelines and see whether they suggest ways to improve your writing. If they do, then use them and be ahead of where you were. If not, then ignore them and lose nothing.

Guidelines for editing clips

  We recommend that you follow a pattern when you write your clips to give the reader cues about the story. Here’s how to evaluate the pattern when you edit your scenes:

  1.  Identify each clip as either a private clip or a public clip, and add a paragraph break between each clip.

    A private clip focuses on the POV character. A public clip focuses on any other character. Eliminate narrative summary if you can.

  2.  Make sure each clip uses the right tools.

    Each private clip can use action, dialogue, interior monologue, or  interior emotion, but it should usually avoid description, which almost always shows things external to the POV character.

Each public clip can use action, dialogue, or description, but it should avoid interior monologue and interior emotion, because your reader can’t know what non-POV characters are thinking and feeling.

  3.  Make sure each clip gets its timing right.

    Here’s how to manage the timing of two events in a clip:

•If they happen at roughly the same time: Show them in the order in which they begin.

•If they begin at the same time: Show them in order from quickest to slowest.

•If they begin at the same time and take the same length of time: 

Show them in whatever order you like best.

In this section, we look at a number of cooked-up examples of poorly done clips and show how to whip them into shape by applying this pattern.

Fixing mixed clips

Consider the following example paragraph, which continues the scene we begin earlier in “Following an example of decision-making”:
A big guy in black leather steps out from where he’s been hiding in the Cookbooks section. He’s got a scar on his left cheek and scruffy gray side-burns, and he’s holding a chainsaw. He starts it up and revs the engine as he strides toward you. “You stole one idea from me, dude, and you ain’t going to steal any more!” “What’s your name?” Your heart is hammering in your chest as the guy in black leather moves toward you. You grab two copies of your book, thinking they might be some protection. 
“Throckmorton,” he says. “But my friends call me Hack.” Throckmorton? What kind of a parent names their kid Throckmorton? “Dude, I’m sure we can talk this out.” Throckmorton stops and points the chainsaw directly at your face. “I’ll let Mr. Stihl do my talking.”
Ouch. That paragraph contains seven clips, three of them private clips and four, public clips.
  We’re not religious about never mixing public and private clips within a paragraph. Occasionally, it can make sense. But we do it as rarely as we’d put the dialogue for two different characters in the same paragraph — and for the same reason: Starting a new paragraph for each clip helps readers keep things straight.

This issue is particularly obvious with the sentence, “Dude, I’m sure we can talk this out.” After you’ve read the entire sentence, you can work out from the context that the speaker is the POV character, not Throckmorton. But there’s no way you can know that when you start reading the sentence. As a result, when you begin reading that sentence, part of your mind is shrieking, “Who’s talking here?” The mixed-up nature of the paragraph is forcing you to work harder than you should, taking you partly out of the story. No author should do that to a reader.
Now split this passage out into one clip per paragraph. It becomes a fair bit easier to read. It also creates more white space on the page, leading the reader’s eye to whiz through the story faster, creating the illusion that things are happening more quickly.
A big guy in black leather steps out from where he’s been hiding in the Cookbooks section. He’s got a scar on his left cheek and scruffy gray side-burns, and he’s holding a chainsaw. He starts it up and revs the engine as he strides toward you. “You stole one idea from me, dude, and you ain’t going to steal any more!” 
“What’s your name?” Your heart is hammering in your chest.
The guy in black leather keeps moving toward you.
You grab two copies of your book, thinking they might be some protection.
“Throckmorton,” he says. “But my friends call me Hack.”
Throckmorton? What kind of a parent names their kid Throckmorton? 
“Dude, I’m sure we can talk this out.”
Throckmorton stops and points the chainsaw directly at your face. “I’ll let Mr. Stihl do my talking.”
This reads better. We’ve changed hardly any words at all, yet we’ve gained quite a lot in clarity. Every little improvement helps. You may argue that this  is a trivial change. Yes, it’s a trivial change, but it’s well worth your time, because you get so much improvement for such a little bit of effort. We recommend separating all clips with paragraph breaks first, before you do anything else.

Fixing unintentional head-hopping

You may choose to use multiple POV characters in a given scene. If you’re writing in either the head-hopping or the omniscient POV, then you’ve made a conscious decision to have more than one POV character in each scene. That’s your artistic choice, and you’re free to make it. (For advice on choosing a POV, see Chapters 7 and 12.)

The problem comes if you intended to stick to a single POV character for a scene but you got inside the head of some other character. Head-hopping mixes the emotive messages you send your reader, so you need to fix it if it’s not part of your chosen POV.
Read the following series of paragraphs, which hop in and out of the heads of multiple characters:
Your audience is backing away from Throckmorton, screaming. One of the women, reminded of her husband, faints dead away on the floor. Two guys grab her and haul her to safety. It occurs to the taller of them that he could’ve thrown a body tackle on Throckmorton from behind and taken him out, but now that he’s a safe distance away, he doesn’t have the guts to go back into danger.
Throckmorton studies you with a malicious grin. He’s remembering the way his father tortured him when he was a boy. He’s remembering how his mother wrung her hands and screamed and never intervened. He’s thinking how much you look like his seventh grade English teacher, who did nothing when he wrote poems about being flogged with a whip.
You can see in Throckmorton’s eyes that he’s going to lunge at you. You slam the book in your left hand hard on the lectern, watching for Throckmorton’s eyes to flick down at the movement. Then you fling the book in your right hand straight at his face.
The problem here is that the reader is getting mixed emotional messages. First, the reader dips inside the head of a woman, who promptly faints. The next instant, the reader is a guy who shows a little courage by helping rescue the woman but not enough to attack Throckmorton. Then, for a full paragraph, the reader becomes Throckmorton and starts to empathize with him because of his brutalized childhood. Finally, the reader returns to the real POV character and now has to fight Throckmorton.
  Your reader wants to know whom to root for. When you let her hop from head to head at random, she’s rooting for everybody, which means she’s rooting for nobody. By trying to do too much, you accomplish too little.
Can you hop between heads effectively? Of course. Margaret Mitchell did it in Gone With the Wind. Mario Puzo did it in The Godfather. But neither of them did it at random. If you’re going to allow yourself into the heads of multiple POV characters in a scene, you need to have a reason for it. You also need to do it carefully and manage your reader’s emotions.
  If you’ve caught yourself head-hopping unintentionally, the solution is simple: Write your POV character using only private clips. Write all other characters in the scene using only public clips.

Here’s a rewrite of the example passage. We have to do radical surgery, and we can’t take our reader as deeply inside the non-POV characters, but she’ll be far more firmly rooted in the real POV character:
Your audience is backing away from Throckmorton, screaming. One of the women faints dead away on the floor. Two guys grab her and haul her to safety.
Throckmorton studies you with a malicious grin, but his eyes are tortured, staring at you with a glazed look, as if you’re somebody he knows. Sweat stands out on his forehead, and an artery throbs in a patchwork of old scars on his wind-burned neck.
You can see in Throckmorton’s eyes that he’s going to lunge at you. You slam the book in your left hand hard on the lectern, watching for Throckmorton’s eyes to flick down at the movement. Then you fling  the book in your right hand straight at his face.
We’ve lost some of the emotive power of Throckmorton’s childhood here. That simply can’t be helped if we’re going to use a single POV character in this scene. But we’ve gained something, too — we’ve given our reader one definite POV character to root for.
You may be wondering whether this scene would work better if you were to write it from Throckmorton’s POV. It might. But if you rewrote it that way, the reader would expect you to put her exclusively in Throckmorton’s mind. We provide tips on choosing a POV character in Chapter 12.

Fixing out-of-body experiences

You may choose to show your reader things your focal character can’t see or know. If you’re writing in third person objective or omniscient POV, then that’s the artistic choice you’ve made. However, if you’ve chosen any other POV, that, too, is an artistic choice, and you need to stick to it consistently.
This next series of paragraphs shows what happens when you show  something that the POV character can’t see:
Throckmorton jerks his head to one side, and the book whizzes past his right ear. Rage lights up his eyes, and he steps toward you, revving the chainsaw.
You grab a handful of copies of your book and back away from him,  holding them up as a shield. You don’t see that you’re about to step on the store’s PR director, who has just fainted behind you.

Things are going well here until we show the reader something the POV character can’t see: the bookstore lady lying passed out on the floor.

What’s wrong with that? Doesn’t it heighten tension? Perhaps. Tension is the expectation of something bad. Showing your reader that the POV character may step on the bookstore lady can ramp up tension. But there’s a cost: 
Showing this reminds the reader that she’s not the POV character, and one of your primary goals is to persuade your reader that she is the POV character.  Don’t destroy the fictive dream just for the sake of a little extra tension. Instead of taking your reader outside the POV character, increase tension by giving your POV character some hint of what’s going on.
If you’ve accidentally wandered outside the head of your POV character, the solution is simple: Write your POV character using only private clips; write all other characters in the scene using only public clips. Show your reader only what your POV character can see, hear, smell, taste, or touch. Here’s a rewrite of the example scene:
Throckmorton jerks his head to one side, and the book whizzes past his right ear. Rage lights up his eyes, and he steps toward you, revving the chainsaw.
You grab a handful of copies of your book and back away from him,  holding them up as a shield.
“Sweet Jesus, help me!” moans the store’s PR director behind you. An instant later, a dull whump on the floor tells you she’s fainted.

Fixing cause-effect problems

Always, always, always show a cause first, and then show the effect. Here’s an example paragraph that breaks this rule:
Fear floods your heart and you dive to your left, cradling your head in your hands and praying that you won’t land on the PR director, just after Throckmorton lunges at you with the chainsaw.This is horrible! We’ve put the cause (Throckmorton’s lunge) at the tail end of a long sentence in which we first show all the effects of the cause (all your reactions to Throckmorton’s lunge). Nothing is more confusing to a reader.  Whenever you see the word after in your fiction, ask whether you’ve put the cause after the effect. If you have, then fix it:
Throckmorton lunges at you with the chainsaw.
Fear floods your heart and you dive to your left, cradling your head in your hands and praying that you won’t land on the PR director.

Fixing time-scale problems

Different processes take different lengths of time. A gunshot is quicker than a wink, which is quicker than a touchdown run, which is quicker than a  presidential election.
  If you show two events happening at the same time, then show the fastest one first. This is a subtle issue, but it’s worth fixing because it adds clarity. In this section, we consider two common ways that time-scale problems can creep in.

Simultaneous events

Read the following sentence, which combines fast-happening and slow- happening events:
The roar of the chainsaw cuts off just as Throckmorton lets out a long, bellowing roar while pitching forward wildly toward the floor.
An author means well when he tries to pack as much as possible into one sentence. However, your reader doesn’t care if you mean well; your reader just cares whether she’s immersed in the story.
The problem here is that we’re trying to make two things simultaneous, but they can’t be simultaneous because they have different time scales — one happens slowly and one happens quickly:

  ✓ Slowly: “Throckmorton falls to the ground while letting out a long, bellowing roar.” This takes a substantial fraction of a second. (Time yourself falling, and you’ll see it takes quite a while.)

  ✓ Quickly: “The roar of the chainsaw cuts off.” This happens almost instantly when his finger slips off the trigger.

  Be suspicious whenever you see two phrases connected by the words just as or as or while. Ask yourself whether those two actions can really happen simultaneously and for the same length of time.
Notice that Throckmorton can be bellowing the entire time he’s falling, so connecting those two events with the word while is perfectly fine. But he can’t fall nearly as fast as the chainsaw can stop roaring. Therefore, using the words just as is a mistake, because it implies that two things happen in the same instant.
  Little things can make a big difference, even if they’re so small that the reader doesn’t see them. The reader may not consciously notice that two things can’t happen simultaneously, but she’ll feel that the passage is a little fuzzy. She’ll say, “I can’t quite visualize it.” And she’s right. You’ve let the action slip out of focus. The solution is to figure out what started first and show that first, even if it’s still going on when the second thing happens.
In Throckmorton’s case, he tripped, staggered forward, let out a long, bellowing roar, and hit the ground. Somewhere in the middle of all that, his finger slipped off the chainsaw trigger and the engine’s roar cut off. So write it that way, in two sentences:
Throckmorton lets out a long, bellowing roar while pitching forward wildly toward the floor. The roar of the chainsaw cuts off.

Special problems in private clips

The following passage mixes up the time scale inside the second private clip (the third paragraph):
You hit the floor and feel the breath go whooshing out of you. For an instant, your vision goes dark. Forcing yourself to shake it off, you  stagger blindly to your feet.
Before you can turn around, Throckmorton grapples you from behind. “Time to die, you Nazi!” A strong hand closes around your throat.
You remember a trick that a friend of yours demonstrated for you when you were researching your book. You stomp on Throckmorton’s instep, jab an elbow in his gut and instinctively claw on the hand at your throat. 
A rush of fear knifes through your belly.
This passage goes fine until the third paragraph, a private clip. There we get the time scales all turned around.
  Here’s the time scale for feelings, instinctive actions, and rational actions and speech:

  ✓ Feelings happen fast, on the order of a few milliseconds.

  ✓ Instinctive actions happen almost as fast, on the order of tenths of a second.

  ✓ Rational actions and speech take the longest, at least half a second.

Therefore, in a private clip that contains all three elements, you need to show the feelings first, then the instinctive actions, and then the rational actions and speech. Take a look at the third paragraph of the example and see how it now makes more sense when we reorder things:
You hit the floor and feel the breath go whooshing out of you. For an instant, your vision goes dark. Forcing yourself to shake it off, you  stagger blindly to your feet.

Before you can turn around, Throckmorton grapples you from behind. “Time to die, you Nazi!” A strong hand closes around your throat.
A rush of fear knifes through your belly. You instinctively claw on the hand at your throat. Then you remember a trick that a friend of yours demonstrated for you when you were researching your book. You stomp on Throckmorton’s instep and jab an elbow in his gut.
Throckmorton’s hold on you weakens.
You spin around, give him a knee plant to the groin, and jab a thumb into the soft spot at the base of his throat.
That’s dirty fighting, of course, but you can’t afford to give Throckmorton a break. You can’t afford to give your reader a break, either. She bought your book because she wanted a powerful emotional experience. If you let your scene get out of focus, even in the tiniest details, you’re giving your reader less than she paid for. Whether you write the grittiest action novels or the gentlest of romances, you owe it to your reader to deliver the most powerful emotional experience you can.

Getting In and Out of Flashbacks

If a flashback is called for, then use it (we discuss how to know whether it’s called for in the earlier section “Deciding Whether to Show or Tell”). The only question left is how to edit your flashback. Remember that a flashback is really nothing but a container for a sequence of clips set in the past, along with a transition at the beginning and the end. We discuss editing clips in the preceding sections. The only other thing you need to worry about is editing your transition points.
There’s nothing mysterious about the transitions. They just need to make it clear that your POV character is flashing back or flashing forward. You normally do this by making an explicit reference to a memory. Here’s an example of how not to do it:

“Tell us how you were able to fight off a man twice your weight,” Larry King says.
Brad says, “Grab me from behind and try to choke me.”
You wrap your arms around his body and reach for his neck. An instant later, pain stabs through your instep. An elbow to your gut steals every molecule of air in your lungs. A hammer shot to your groin sends an explosion of pain rocketing up your insides.
“I guess I just think fast on my feet,” you say.

Whoa! The switch from Larry King to Brad to Larry is confusing. The problem is that we rush too fast into the flashback and too fast out. The reader needs cues each way to bookend the flashback, like this:
“Tell us how you were able to fight off a man twice your weight,” Larry King says.
You’ve been trying for two years to forget the day you interviewed your ex-SEAL friend Brad on street-fighting tactics for your book.
Brad says, “Grab me from behind and try to choke me.”
You wrap your arms around his body and reach for his neck. An instant later, pain stabs through your instep. An elbow to your gut steals every molecule of air in your lungs. A hammer shot to your groin sends an explosion of pain rocketing up your insides.
That was two years ago, and you still haven’t forgiven Brad. You didn’t give him an acknowledgment in your book. You haven’t told a soul about that interview.
You blink at Larry King and give him a crooked grin. “I guess I just think fast on my feet.”

Editing Telling

We hope you aren’t under the impression that we hate telling — narrative summary, exposition, or static description. Far from it. These telling tools have their place in any story. If you don’t believe us, read the first page of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone. The entire page is telling, and it’s brilliant. It works. If you’re going to tell, make sure that — at the very least — it works. If you can arrange to be brilliant, do that, too (see the nearby sidebar 
“Creating your own style” for our notes on becoming brilliant).Here are the most common problems we see with telling and some ways to liven up these telling segments:

  ✓ Wordiness: Be as concise as you can.

  ✓ Abstract language: Be as concrete as possible. Use strong nouns and verbs and vivid details.

  ✓ Explaining too much: Resist the urge to explain.

We discuss these three fixes in this section.

Tightening text and adding color

Editing often means both cutting out unneeded words and inserting words that add vividness. Here’s an example of a segment of telling that needs both tightening and color:
Walking through the airport after your interview, you realize that the near disaster at your first book signing has been good for your career. Airports often have bookstores, because airline passengers have little to do in the air, so many of them like to read. Every bookstore you pass on the way to your gate has lots of copies of your book. You fall asleep on the flight home and have a disturbing dream that gives you an idea for your  next book.
This is mostly narrative summary, with a bit of exposition. There just isn’t much going on here to advance the story, so we clearly don’t want to show this segment using clips. However, we don’t want to cut it altogether, because it makes a nice transition from the previous scene to the next one, when you’re home thinking about your next novel.

The first two sentences explain too much. If the disaster at your book signing got you on the Larry King show, then obviously it was good for your career. Most people know why airports have bookstores, and those who don’t know can easily guess. Resist the urge to explain.
The last two sentences lack any color or concrete details. Even though you aren’t showing the walk through the airport or the flight, you can still make them a bit more vivid.
Here’s an edited version of the same segment that trims out the excess words and unnecessary explanation and puts in just a bit of color:
Walking through the airport after your interview, you pass a Barnes & Noble with a ceiling-high display of your books. While you sit waiting at your gate, six different passengers approach you clutching copies of your book and ask for autographs. You close your eyes on the plane, hoping for some sleep. You get a little, but your dreams are disturbed by hundreds of Throckmorton clones, all bearing chainsaws, all chanting your name. As your plane descends into your home airport, the last orange rays of the dying sun reflect on the windows of the terminal building in an explosion of color. And just like that, you know what your next book has to be about.
Notice that the edited version is longer than the original, even though we cut out the unnecessary explanations. That’s because we’ve inserted some concrete details, and those details add words.

Knowing when to kill a segment of telling

Sometimes you find a segment of telling that doesn’t need editing; it needs killing. Here are the most common reasons you may want to cut a segment completely:

  ✓ Telling the backstory: Every author knows that backstory is bad — for other authors. Every author thinks that he is the lone exception and can get away with writing pages of backstory in chapter one because the reader is dying to know it. This is a lie from the pits of hell. The reader doesn’t care two figs about your backstory in chapter one. Readers only start caring about a character’s backstory when they start knowing the character.
   If you tell any backstory in your first five chapters, ask yourself whether you’re willing to pay your editor ten dollars per word for the right to leave it in. If so, then keep it, in because it must be brilliant. Otherwise, take a chainsaw to it.

✓ Explaining the story world: Writers have a saying: “Resist the urge to explain.” We won’t bother to explain why this is true, but it is. Explain as little of your story world as possible.

  ✓ Expounding on a theme: Your reader is smart and doesn’t need to have the deep meaning of your novel explained. Explaining your work makes it shallower. Resist, resist, resist the urge to explain.
For some more solid advice on editing segments of telling, see the chapters on description and exposition in Revision & Editing, by James Scott Bell (Writer’s Digest).

MARGINALIA:

Creating your own style

As you advance in the art and craft of writing fiction, you’ll find a style that works for you. In this book, we’re cautious about trying to teach you  how  to  create  your  style,  because  it’s such an intensely personal thing. You do have options — loads of them. Here are a few questions for you to think about as you develop your style:

 ✓  How important is style to you (as compared to the other four pillars of fiction — story world, character, plot, and theme)?

 ✓  Do you want a distinctive style that sets you apart from all other writers, or do you prefer to write in a style that doesn’t distract the reader from the story?

 ✓  Do  you  have  a  particular  author  whose style is similar to the one you’d like to have or the one you already have? If so, how are you different from that author?

 ✓  Do you write in a category with a typical style that your readers will expect you to conform to? (A hard-boiled detective novel has a flavor very different from a Regency romance.)

 ✓  How important is it to you to avoid clichés? Must every sentence you write be fresh and original? Or has “outside the box” become the new box?

We can’t tell you which style is best for you. We do encourage you to experiment with new stylistic techniques. Do they resonate with you? Do they work for your test readers? If so, then keep them. If not, then don’t. Your natural style will bloom in its own time.



}
{

Part IV

Getting Published

In this part . . .

Although some people may be happy being great, unpublished novelists, for most writers, getting published is the reason they write. In this part, we take a look at what it takes to get published, including info on cleaning up your manuscript, developing a winning book proposal, finding an agent, and selling your novel to a publisher (with or without an agent).

Chapter 16

Getting Ready to Sell Your Book: Polishing and Submitting

In This Chapter

Polishing your manuscript

Ironing out potential legal issues

Choosing between traditional publishing and self-publishing

Writing a query letter

Sending more information — the proposal

Selling fiction is about writing excellent fiction. That’s why, in this book, we’ve focused on improving your writing craft — because 90 percent of marketing is having great craft.
Before you start contacting agents or editors, you need to make sure that your manuscript is as perfect as you can make it. In today’s competitive market, “good enough” is just not good enough. After you complete and edit your manuscript, it still needs final polishing. In this chapter, we give you some tips on doing that.
When the manuscript is truly ready to go, you still need to make a critical decision: Will you try to sell your novel to a traditional publishing house, or will you try other options? With today’s advances in technology, you have more options than ever. Does working with a traditional publisher still make sense? That depends, but most often the answer is yes. In this chapter, we discuss those ticklish “other options” and tell you when you may want to consider them and why.
If you decide to work with a traditional publisher, then selling your novel almost always begins with either a query or a proposal. A query is a concise letter designed to help you attract the attention of an agent and then an editor. A proposal is much like a query, but with much more information. 
Writing a good query or proposal isn’t hard, and we lay out all the principles here in this chapter. You have lots of freedom to be creative, but you have to avoid certain pitfalls if you don’t want an instant rejection.

If you want detailed information on dealing with agents and publishers, we recommend reading Getting Your Book Published For Dummies (Wiley). We discuss agents and editors a bit more in Chapter 17. For now, though, in this chapter, we give you the basics on how to make the crucial first approach.

Polishing Your Manuscript

The usual process for preparing a novel for publication goes like this:

  1.  Write the first draft, using whatever creative paradigm works best for you. (Chapter 4 outlines several creative paradigms. Chapters 6 to 11 discuss the various aspects of writing the first draft.)

  2.  Edit the manuscript at least once, and possibly several times. (Chapters 12 to 15 give you a strategy and some analytic tools for editing your manuscript.)

  3.  Get feedback from a serious writer or an agent or editor or some other publishing professional. (Don’t ask one of your relatives or non-writer friends; they love you too much to give you the painful criticism you may need.) Use the feedback to edit the manuscript again.

  4.  Proofread the final manuscript, or hire a proofreader to do it for you, to eliminate any spelling errors or grammatical flaws.

Can you polish your manuscript to a high gleam all by yourself? Yes, it’s  possible. We’ve seen it done. We’ve done it. However, most writers edit their own manuscript until it’s as good as they can make it, and then they get an outside opinion. We assume that you’ve completed steps 1 and 2 above, and that now you’re ready for steps 3 and 4 — to get an outside opinion from a qualified person. In this section, we look at your options.

Teaming with critique buddies

A critique buddy is a writing friend with whom you trade critiquing favors. The usual way this works is that you trade sample chapters and critique them. The ideal critique buddy loves the category you’re writing and really gets you and what you’re trying to say. He or she understands you well enough to know how best to work with you. If you’re sensitive and your ego is easily wounded, then your critique buddy should know how to lay on the praise for what you do well and then salt in helpful comments on your weaknesses. If you’re rhino-skin tough, then your critique buddy should know how to pierce your armor and make you see the things that need fixing.

Where do you find critique buddies? Wherever you can find them. Randy has found most of his at writing conferences, usually when he wasn’t looking for them. You may find your critique buddy in a writing class, in a critique group, in an online writing group, or in the frozen foods section at the supermarket. Where you find them doesn’t really matter, as long as you’re both agreeable to working together.
Critique buddies aren’t forever. You may outgrow yours, outlast them, or outlive them. The important idea is that each of you should benefit the other. As long as you’re both happy with the relationship, then let it continue. When it’s not working out, let it fade away.

Joining critique groups

A critique group is a group of writers who meet periodically to critique each other’s writing. You can meet in person or online, whichever is more convenient. Most critique groups meet at least monthly. Some meet as often as once a week, which is pretty intense. Some meet sporadically.
Typically, the quality of critique you get varies. The rank beginners in your group may not have the skills to give a good critique, but they’ll learn if you take the time to train them. Having at least one published author or very strong writer who can give guidance and lay down the law when one of the members is giving bogus advice is great, but this isn’t a requirement.
  What a critique group may lack in consistency it makes up for in variety. If you have a group of five to ten members, you get a wide range of opinions. You need to develop some judgment to know whose opinion you trust, but you may find that even the greenest critiquer will sometimes nail you perfectly, so don’t ever write off anyone’s opinion as useless.
Where do you find a critique group? One common way is to join an organization that has one or more existing critique groups that you can join. If you have a local writing center or writing club, it may have some critique groups. 
Likewise, the local university or college may organize critique groups, or you can try craigslist (www.craigslist.org). If you have enough friends who write or want to write, you may try forming your own critique group. You need to have at least one person in the group who is good enough at organization to make sure that the group runs smoothly.
  No critique group lasts forever, but they may last you a good long time. Randy was in the same group for about eight years, and that group brought him from the middle freshman-writer stage all the way to the junior level. (See Chapter 1 for a discussion of the four stages of a novelist’s road to publication.)

Working with freelance editors

Every novelist needs a substantive editor — someone who helps critique characters, structure, plot, and theme. The longer you work in the publishing industry, the more firmly you’ll believe this. When a publisher buys your novel, it assigns you a substantive editor to help you do revisions on the structure of your novel. A substantive editor doesn’t fix your work. Instead, she tells you what she thinks you need to fix and why, leaving you to restructure your manuscript and rewrite things in your own unique style.
Substantive editing is different from copy editing — where an editor helps fix problems in formatting and style. Copy editing helps ensure that your work is clear, correct, concise, comprehensible, and consistent (the so-called “Five Cs.”) 
  You may feel that you need a substantive edit or a copy edit before you try to sell your work. If you think so, then odds are that you do. (Even if you don’t think so, you may need one.) Randy published his first novel without a freelance editor, but he wrote his next two with a co-author and discovered the value of having a strong critical eye look over the manuscript before submitting it to the publisher. Soon after that, he began working with a freelance editor, and he doesn’t think he’ll ever try to write a novel without one again.
Where do you find a freelance editor? You can do a search online and you’ll find an enormous number of them. (If you choose one this way, ask for references and be sure you know exactly what you’re getting before you sign a contract.) If you belong to a writing organization, such as Romance Writers of America (RWA) or Mystery Writers of America (MWA), you’ll find a fair number of freelance editors among the members — many excellent novelists work part time as freelance editors. You may also have a writer friend who can refer you to a good editor, or you may meet one at a writing conference. 
Many college English and Journalism departments have postings for freelance editors. 
  If you decide to hire a freelance editor, consider these guidelines:

  ✓ Look for someone who understands fiction, loves your category, and gets you and your writing.

  ✓ Look for someone who knows how sensitive you are to criticism and can adjust the level of her sting to get through your armor without killing your drive to write.

  ✓ Tell the freelance editor what sort of work you want done. If you only want an analysis of your story structure, tell her. If you think only your characters need attention, tell her. If you want a complete analysis of the whole story, tell her. You’re the boss, so you get to decide what work your editor will do for you.

✓ Make sure you understand the editor’s rates in advance and get an estimate on how many hours she’ll need to evaluate your work. Also, make clear in advance just what you expect to get out of the evaluation. Are you looking for someone to merely suggest changes that you’ll then make, or do you want your editor to actually edit the manuscript to make the changes herself?

  ✓ Get references and ask yourself how similar you are to the person who gave the references. The freelance editor will give you references only from people who like her work, so you need to decide how likely it is that she’ll mesh with you as well as she does with her other clients. A good freelance editor can help push you to a level that you’d never reach on your own. A bad freelance editor will merely waste your money.

Hiring freelance proofreaders

Some writers need a proofreader — someone to catch and fix errors in punctuation, usage, grammar, and spelling. You may find that these mechanical aspects of writing simply escape you. This doesn’t mean you’re a bad writer. Many great writers have been unable to master these mechanical skills. If your critique buddy or critique group routinely finds typos of this type, you may need to hire a professional proofreader to clean up your manuscript before you try to sell it. This isn’t acceptance of a moral or intellectual failing; it’s acceptance of a mechanical weakness. A fair number of professional novelists routinely hire proofreaders to fix up these minor issues.
A proofreader’s job is not to change your writing. She won’t analyze your story structure, characters, or theme. She’ll just fix those pesky commas and spelling errors and busted syntax. If you need a proofreader, hire one. You can find proofreaders the same way you find freelance editors (see our suggestions in the previous section) — online, in writing organizations, by referral from writer friends, at a writing conference, or at a college. Ask for references and hire one who fits your budget.
One final thought — the proofreading stage should come only after you’ve edited your manuscript, because editing usually means structural change and always includes a lot of rewriting. If you were to edit after you proofread, you’d probably introduce a whole new set of typos that need to be proofread again.

Looking at Three Common  Legal Questions

Your manuscript is edited, polished, and ready for publishing. Before you start thinking about which type of publishing you want to pursue (see the next section), stop and make sure you’ve addressed some common legal issues that sometimes affect writers. These issues should be ironed out prior to working with an agent, editor, or publishing house or service.Standard disclaimer: We aren’t lawyers and nothing here should be construed as legal advice. For detailed information on contracts and the legal issues associated with getting published, contact a lawyer or refer to the book Getting Your Book Published For Dummies (Wiley). However, we’d like to answer some of the common questions we get about legal issues. Here’s our best understanding of these issues:

  ✓ Should you copyright your novel before submitting it to agents or editors to protect yourself from them stealing your work? No. U.S. copyright law says that anything you write is automatically copyrighted as soon as you write it, so you don’t need to protect it further by registering a copyright. Doing so is a fine way to tell the world, “I’m an amateur interested in doing business with you, but I don’t trust you not to steal my idea.” If and when you get your novel published, the publisher will usually pay for the copyright to be registered in your name.

  ✓ Are you allowed to base your novel on real people and real situations? That depends, and if you have any doubts, you should talk to an attorney about your specific case. Libel is a false statement, either published or broadcast, that damages a person’s reputation. A dead person cannot be libeled. If you tell the truth about a public figure, then that’s not libel (but you’d better be able to prove it’s the truth). If you tell the truth about a living non-public figure, that’s not libel, either, but it may very well be invasion of privacy, and you could be hit with a lawsuit. The living relatives of a dead person may also sue you for invasion of their privacy. 
   If you insist on writing fiction about people who aren’t public figures, then change everything you can — names, dates, genders, ethnic backgrounds, and any specifics that make it clear who your characters actually are. Or get permission. If you base your character on a real person (like yourself or someone close to you), you risk creating a Mary Sue — an idealized character who’s too good to be true.

  ✓ Can you quote from books, newspaper articles, magazine articles, or songs? This is tricky. A concept called fair use defines how much you can quote from copyrighted sources. It depends on a number of factors, such as how much you’re quoting, what fraction of the original you’re quoting, what economic impact it has on the source you’re quoting, and so on. The issue is complicated, and your best bet is to get permission or consult an attorney. Lyrics from songs are especially tricky, and often you can’t quote any of it without paying. You can quote anything in the public domain — works too old to be protected by copyright, or works intentionally released as public domain by their authors. However, you still need to tell the original source of a quotation from a public domain source so you won’t be accused of plagiarism.If you have doubts about any legal question, consult an attorney.

Deciding between Traditional Publishing and Self-Publishing

In the old days, you wrote a manuscript, mailed it off to a publisher, and hoped for the best. These days, you have other options. We explain them here.

Understanding how traditional  publishers work

With a traditional royalty-paying publisher, the publishing company takes all the risk and earns most of the profits on a book. Here’s how the process works, in brief:

  1.  You write a manuscript (or a partial manuscript if you’re a published author with a good track record for meeting deadlines), and then write a query letter or proposal and send it to an agent.
    If the agent agrees to represent you and your book, she then contacts acquisitions editors at several publishing houses. Or if you decide not to work with an agent, you submit your work directly to acquisitions editors for consideration. (See later in this chapter for information on how to write a query letter or proposal.)

  2.  The acquisitions editor considers your work and decides whether it merits publication and whether it’s likely to sell enough copies to be worth their while from a business perspective. Publishers are not in business to fulfill your ambition to get published. They’re in business to make money. If they don’t believe they’ll make money publishing your work, they won’t try.

On average, publishers want a book to sell (at the very least) eight thousand copies in three years, to offset printing costs and turn a profit (six-to-eight thousand is the minimum print run required by most major printers). The bigger the publisher, of course, the more copies they want to print and sell in that three-year period – but most publishing houses aren’t very big.
    Usually, the acquisitions editor needs to get agreement from a publishing committee that includes executives of the publishing company, the marketing director, the sales director, and other editors.

  3.  If the publisher decides to pursue your manuscript, the editor will call your agent (or you, if you don’t have an agent) and make an offer.
    Along with the offer comes a lengthy written contract that spells out every detail of the agreement. You’ll be offered a royalty — a percentage on every book sold. Normally, you’ll also be offered an advance against royalties. This is a fixed sum that the publisher pays you before your book actually earns any money.
    If your royalties don’t earn enough to cover the advance payment, you won’t be asked to repay the advance. The publisher is therefore risking that advance payment, along with the money it pays its editors, marketing team, sales force, and printer.

  4.  You or your agent negotiate the terms of the contract with the publisher until all parties are happy.
    Then you sign the contract and work with the publisher to complete the book, revise it, launch it, and promote it. Your agent is paid a fixed percentage (traditionally 15 percent, though the number may vary) of any payments you receive from the publisher.
The above arrangement is obviously low-risk for you, the author. Only the publisher invests any money upfront. You put in some effort and time, but you don’t invest a dime in the product. If the book tanks, you lose nothing but your time and effort.
  With a traditional publisher, your earnings are only a small fraction of the total sales of the book. The publisher is taking most of the risk, and it therefore expects most of the reward. It provides the editorial assistance and cover design, and it pays the marketing, sales, production, and publicity costs. You’re expected to help on promotion, but you aren’t expected to pay for it (although you can if you think it’ll benefit you).

Understanding how self-publishing works

  You don’t have to work with a traditional royalty-paying publisher, of course. You may well ask why you should pay somebody else to do what  you could do better. You can hire a freelance editor to help you make the manuscript a polished masterpiece. You can hire a graphic designer to do the cover and interior design. You can hire someone to typeset the book, someone to print it, someone to warehouse it, someone to make deals with distributors, someone to market it and publicize it.
You can even do some or all those things yourself if you have the skills. You wouldn’t get an advance, but you’d get all the profits on the book, which could be substantial.
Over the last few decades, as computer technology has invaded publishing, more and more writers have tried their hand at self-publishing — being their own publishers. A number of them have made phenomenal successes of their books. Be aware that most of the successful self-published books have been non-fiction. It’s much harder to make a success of a self-published novel. You have two main options if you self-publish. You can get a large number of books printed all at once, or you can make an arrangement with a print-on-demand (POD) company, which will print only as many copies as you need, as often as you need them. It’s more expensive and more hassle to print thousands of copies up front, but the cost per copy is much less than it is for a POD copy. POD publishing is rapidly becoming more popular, because it’s a fairly inexpensive way to get a book in print.
To add even more complexity, the market is finally opening up to electronic books (eBooks) which can be produced and distributed very cheaply. The Amazon Kindle and other eBook readers show promise of radically changing the world of publishing in the next few years. These days, any publishing contract spells out the eBook rights in detail. It’s unclear what fraction of the market eBooks will claim in the future, but most people think eBooks will be an important part of the market from now on. 
Why don’t all writers self-publish their novels and reap the rewards? The answer is simple: Publishing is work — hard work. Editing, graphics, marketing, sales, and publicity are all highly specialized skills that take a lot of time and effort before you reach excellence. Publishing is also a risky business, and fiction is one of the riskiest categories in the industry. Most novels just don’t do as well as the publisher hoped. This is true at even the very largest publishing houses, and it’s especially true for self-publishers.

The biggest problem for the novelist is that marketing fiction is extremely hard. A very few authors have made enormous profits self-publishing their novels. (William Paul Young’s self-published novel, The Shack, is one of the few self-published novels that’s done well. It reportedly sold more than 6 million copies in its first two years.) However, the vast majority of self-published novelists sell only a few dozen up to a few hundred copies. You can sell only so many copies to your friends and relatives.
We believe that self-publishing can sometimes make good business sense, if you have a strong marketing platform in place. Please note that it’s much harder to build a marketing platform for fiction than for nonfiction. Should you self-publish your novel? Maybe, if any of the following are true:

  ✓ You know for certain that you can market a lot of copies of the book.

  ✓ You only want a few copies for yourself, friends, and relatives.

  ✓ You demand complete control and ownership of your work and the creative process that goes into it.

Beware the vanity publishers!

You may have seen ads in magazines that offer to publish your book, sight unseen, no questions asked. Have you ever wondered how these “publishers” can make money when they don’t even know whether your book’s any good?
The answer is that they take no risk; you do. You invest the money to pay for the production of your book. The “publisher” just takes your work and prints it. In the worst cases, they don’t edit it at all. If they do edit it, you pay them for the editing. The publisher provides a cover design, but you pay for it. You pay for the printer, the paper, the warehousing. In the worst cases, you then have to buy copies from the publisher (even though you already paid for them). All too often, this sort of publisher does nothing to promote your book — no marketing, no publicity, no sales team, no deals with book distributors. These publishers are often called vanity publishers (especially those who will publish anything, regardless of quality) because they cater to your desire to get published at any cost. An alternative term is subsidy publisher. Some subsidy publishers are quite picky about what they’ll publish and exercise a lot of quality control. 
  Bookstores usually won’t place orders with vanity publishers, because there’s no quality control with a vanity press. Bookstores don’t want to buy something unless they can sell it. If you owned a bookstore, you wouldn’t either. If you browse around on the Web, you’ll find plenty of controversy about whether vanity publishing (or subsidy publishing) is a good deal for the author. Some writers maintain that this kind of publishing is always a bad deal. Others insist that there’s a broad spectrum, and that some subsidy publishers are legitimate.
Should you work with a vanity publisher or subsidy publisher? Maybe, if you want to self-publish but you want somebody else to do all of the production work that a self-publisher would normally do. (See the previous section for some reasons you might decide to self-publish.)
  If you’re tempted to work with a vanity publisher or subsidy publisher, be very careful and ask lots of questions. Better yet, ask some industry professionals about any company you’re interested in working with. Published authors, literary agents, and editors at traditional publishers all have plenty of experience in telling the scams from the real thing. (This is also true when choosing an agent or a traditional publisher — ask around if you don’t know an agent or publisher’s reputation.)

Our recommendation

We believe that a novelist’s best deal is usually to work with a traditional royalty-paying publisher who’ll take the risk and will do the hard work of marketing your novel. Almost every novel by a traditional publisher will sell thousands to tens of thousands of copies. Almost every self-published novel will sell dozens to hundreds of copies. You don’t need a calculator to do the math on which one is a better deal.
If you decide to work with a traditional publisher, you need to find one willing to work with you. We strongly recommend that you get an agent to help you sell your work to a publisher. (We discuss agents in Chapter 17). It is still possible these days to sell a novel without an agent, but it’s much harder than it used to be. Most novels sold these days to traditional publishers are represented by an agent.
To get an agent, you usually need to write a query letter in order to make first contact. We discuss that next.

First Contact: Writing a Query Letter

When you contact an agent or editor for the first time, you usually send a query letter — a short introduction which tells about you and your book and asks whether they’re interested in hearing more. (Chapter 17 tells you more about agents and editors. You should always check the Web site of the agency or publisher to see exactly how they prefer to be contacted. Follow their directions precisely.) It’s okay to query more than one agent at a time. We highly recommend that you query several at a time, because agents often take a long time to answer queries.
The purpose of a query letter is to get the agent or editor to ask for more information. You should be as short as possible. Publishing professionals are extremely busy and they receive many queries every day. The quicker they can make a decision, the more they’ll appreciate you. If they want to know more, they’ll ask for more.
For a very detailed description about how to write a query letter, we recommend agent Noah Lukeman’s e-book, How to Write a Great Query Letter, available on Amazon.com.
You can send a query either by regular mail or as an e-mail. The Web site of the agent or publisher will tell you which they prefer. Here’s how to set up your query letter if you’re sending a paper copy. Use one-inch margins on the sides and single-space the letter in a good readable font such as 12-point Times New Roman.

  ✓ Create a letterhead at the top of the page. It should contain your

•Name

•Mailing address

•Phone number

•E-mail address

   The type size for your name can be a bit larger than the usual 12 points, whereas the type size for your contact information can be a bit smaller.

  ✓ Address the letter to the agent or editor by name. Spell his name correctly. If you’re querying an editor, it’s a good idea to call the main phone line of the publisher (don’t call the editor) and double-check that the editor you’re interested in still works for the publisher and verify her job title. Editors move around frequently, and you don’t want to query someone who left two months ago.

  ✓ Begin with a hook — a sentence that creates interest right away. If you’re querying an agent, a good hook might be that one of his other clients referred you. It might be some startling fact related to your novel. It might be your storyline. It might be something remarkable about you. Follow the hook up with a sentence or two more that develops it further.

  ✓ Write a one-paragraph summary of roughly the first quarter of your manuscript that ends with the story question of your novel. Focus on the big picture, not the details, and be as concise as possible. This will probably be an expansion of your one-sentence storyline, which we  discuss in Chapters 8 and 13. Write it in present tense, just as you would for a synopsis.

✓ Add a paragraph telling a little about you. If you can name a strong reason why you’re the best person on the planet to write this novel, then say so here. For example, if you’re a cop or ex-cop writing a police-procedural mystery, then that’s extremely relevant. If you’ve published a novel or even a short story in a good fiction journal, say so.
   Resist the urge to tell how much your mother loves your story. Say nothing about how you’ve been reading fiction since you were four years old. The editor assumes both of these are true, because she’s already read thousands of queries from people just like you. She wants to know what makes you different from every other writer. Tell her. Don’t be weird, but do be real.

  ✓ Finish by asking permission to send more information. “May I send you some sample chapters and a synopsis or a proposal?” is plenty  for your closing paragraph.
  When you write a query letter, make it brief, clear, and professional, and tailor it to the recipient. It’s easy for authors to shotgun out zillions of queries, so if you send a query, personalize it so that the agent knows you have some reason to be querying her — other than that she’s listed in Writer’s Market. The agent or editor is looking for any sign that you failed to do your homework about her company. Nothing shouts “Reject me!” faster than a query that’s obviously been sent to everyone.
 
Here is a sample query letter for Randy’s novel Oxygen, which he coauthored with John B. Olson. This is a simplified version of the actual letter that Randy and John used when they submitted their work to editor Steve Laube:

Dear Mr. Laube:
Getting to Mars is easy. NASA engineers have known since the 1990s how to put humans on the Red Planet, using a mission design invented by Dr. Robert Zubrin, president of the Mars Society. The hard part is getting astronauts to Mars alive.
In our science-based thriller OXYGEN, four astronauts launch from Cape Canaveral in January of 2014, bound for Mars. Soon after the trans-Mars injection burn, an explosion leaves the crew without enough oxygen to get to Mars and without sufficient fuel to return to earth. To make matters worse, evidence suggests that the ship was sabotaged by one of the crew members. The only way they might reach Mars is for one astronaut to put the others into drug-induced comas. But first they have to decide whom they can trust.
Our qualifications: Randy has a Ph.D. in physics from UC-Berkeley and John has a Ph.D. in biochemistry from UW-Madison. We’re members of the Mars Society and have talked with Dr. Robert Zubrin at a recent Mars Society conference. Randy is the author of a time-travel novel, Transgression.

May we send you some sample chapters and a synopsis or full proposal?
Sincerely,
Randy Ingermanson and John B. Olson

Piecing Together a Proposal

If an agent likes your query letter, he’ll ask for more information. What sort of information? That depends on how interested he is in you and on what information he thinks he needs. It also depends on the expectations of the publishers he might submit your novel to. It’s complicated, and there isn’t any one set of information that fits all situations.
In this section, we describe the maximal amount of information that you’re likely to need to send. Some agents will ask for less, but we don’t think any will ask for more. The maximal package is called a proposal — a business plan for your novel. In it, you describe a proposed joint business venture between you and a publisher. The proposal contains all the information an agent needs to sell your novel. It contains all the information an acquisitions editor needs to make an informed decision and to sell the idea to her publishing committee. (See Chapter 17 for more information on agents and acquisitions editors.)
An agent will use this information for two purposes:

  ✓ To decide whether he wants to represent you.

  ✓ To help him sell your novel to a publisher. Some agents will pass on some or all of your information directly to editors. Other agents will repackage the information before submitting it. Every agent has his own style of selling.

Deciding what to include

There isn’t any universal format or any rulebook for what goes into a proposal, but here are the main items that you might be asked for. You may be asked for only a few of these, but you’d be smart to have them all prepared and ready to go before you query:

  ✓ A cover letter

  ✓ A title page with contact info

  ✓ An executive summary page

  ✓ An analysis of your competition

✓ Character sketches

  ✓ A two-page synopsis of your story

  ✓ Your author bio

  ✓ Any information on how you might help market your book

  ✓ Sample chapters (typically the first three chapters or the first 30 pages, but sometimes the full polished manuscript, depending on what the agent wants to see)

  Send only as much material as the agent requests. He’ll tell you what he wants when he answers your query letter. If you met the agent at a conference and he requested information, he’ll give you a list of things to send. 
  Don’t create your own cover art. Don’t include chocolate, granola, lingerie, or any other gifts. (Yes, really, all of these have been tried countless times, and all of these scream, “I’m an amateur.”) If you act like an amateur, the agent will treat you like an amateur. If you act like a pro, he’ll treat you like a pro. We recommend that everything you send an agent be business-like and concise.

Your cover letter: Reminding  the agent who you are

Your cover letter reminds the agent of who you are and explains that you’re enclosing information that he requested after reading your query letter or after meeting you at a conference. The cover letter is almost identical to a query letter (for details on the content of a query letter, see the earlier  section titled “First Contact: Writing a Query Letter”). Start with a paragraph reminding the agent that he’s asked for more information. End with a paragraph describing what’s enclosed in the package.

Your title page

The title page should have your name, mailing address, phone number, and e-mail address in the upper left corner, all single-spaced and left-aligned. Add several blank lines and write the title of your novel in large type (36-point type is a fine size if the title is short). Italicize the title and center it horizontally and vertically on the page.

The executive summary page

The executive summary page should have a centered header in a large point size that says “Executive Summary” or something similar. Keep your executive summary to one page and make it as clear and succinct as possible. 
  This page should be a “proposal within a proposal” that makes the best possible case for your book. 

The executive summary page should contain the following information. We like to use a two-column format that shows a subheader in the left column and the corresponding information in the right column. 

  ✓ Working title: This is the current title for your book. The publisher often believes that they can come up with a better title, so the title will probably change.

  ✓ Category: This is the category and subcategory of your book. Getting this right is critical, because an editor may reject your project instantly if the category isn’t right for her. See Chapter 3 for a full discussion of categories.

  ✓ High concept: Base the high concept on your one-sentence storyline for your novel. See Chapters 8 and 13 for details on your storyline. You can use your storyline or you can adapt it slightly, but stick to one sentence and make it as short as possible.

  ✓ Target readers: Describe in one or two sentences your ideal readers. See Chapter 3 for a discussion of your target readers.

  ✓ Length: Estimate to the nearest 5,000 words the word count that your manuscript has or will have. (See Chapter 3 for a discussion of the importance of word count for certain categories and how to determine what yours should be.) In some categories, a word count that’s too high or too low can be an instant show-stopper.

  ✓ Completion date: You should either say, “A polished manuscript is available now” or, “The polished manuscript will be complete by ___,” and fill in the blank with a date that you’re sure you can finish the novel before. 

Publishers will believe you mean this date, so don’t fib.
   Selling a novel without a complete manuscript is almost impossible for a first-time novelist. Writing a novel is no easy task, and many wannabe writers never finish one, so publishers almost always refuse to buy an incomplete manuscript from a first-timer. If you’ve already published at least one novel with a traditional, royalty-paying publisher, then most publishers will consider you a strong bet to finish another, so you can sell a novel with just a proposal and some sample chapters. Most professional novelists do so.

✓ Story summary: Write a paragraph that tells the setup for your story, describes your lead character, and ends with the story question. (See Chapters 6, 7, and 8 for a discussion of the story question.)

  ✓ About the author: If you have room on your executive summary page, write a paragraph about yourself. Put your best foot forward, but don’t lie. Later in your proposal, you’ll include a full one-page author bio, so if you don’t have room for the short version on your executive summary page, then skip it. The goal here is to highlight any cool facts about you that will make it blindingly obvious that you’re the perfect author for your story.

Market analysis: Analyzing  your competition

On a new page, make a header that says “Market Analysis” or something similar. This section will be a half page up to a full page telling a bit about similar books. 
  Talk about books that are neither too famous nor too obscure. If you compare your novel to those of Fyodor Dostoevsky or Stephen King or some other monstrously famous author, then you risk either sounding horribly egotistical or else looking pretty lame by comparison. But if you compare your work to some complete unknowns, then you risk looking like an author doomed to obscurity.
Choose three to five books that are in the same category as yours. Write a paragraph about each, giving the title and author and a one-sentence summary of each. Explain how your book is similar and how it’s different. Avoid slamming the other authors. Putting down other writers doesn’t make you look bigger.
  Your purpose in giving a list of similar books is to demonstrate that you’re familiar with your category and that there’s actually a market for the kind of book you wrote (or want to write). It also gives you a chance to show that you understand how to analyze a story. 

Your author bio

Create a page within your proposal with the header “Author Bio.” Write several paragraphs describing yourself in third person. Avoid bragging. Instead, try to describe yourself the way a journalist would if she were writing a profile of you in Time magazine. Be business-like and efficient, focusing on what qualifies you to write your book. If your life is similar to that of one of your characters, then say so. 
Mention your writing credits, if any, without boasting. If you have a Web site or blog, mention it and give the URL. If you have any special marketing platform, such as a newspaper column, a radio show, a TV show, a speaking business, or status as a public figure, then describe it, telling roughly how many people you get in front of in a given year. Don’t stretch the truth. Lies have a nasty way of kicking you in the keister, usually at the worst possible time.
  Don’t pad things out with fluff. The agent and editor simply don’t care how many years you’ve been reading or what a precocious writer you were as a child. Many writers began writing between the ages of 5 and 10, and your editor has already heard every possible piece of puffery many times over. Few of your childhood accomplishments are worth mentioning here. If you graduated from high school at age 10, or won the National Spelling Bee, those would merit a sentence in your bio. 
Mention any education beyond high school that bears directly on the subject of your novel. For example, if you’re writing a science-based novel and hold a college degree in science, say so. If you’re a lawyer or paralegal writing a legal thriller, don’t keep it a secret. A college major in English literature or journalism would be worth a mention, but such majors are as common as dust bunnies and almost as valuable. An MFA degree in creative writing carries quite a bit more weight and you should mention it if you have one.
Also tell about any life experience that fits the subject of your novel. Even childhood experiences may be worth mentioning if they’re powerful enough and fit your novel well enough. For example, if your parents were career diplomats with the Foreign Service, and you grew up in Paris, Rome, London, 
Tokyo, and Jerusalem—and routinely rubbed shoulders with heads of state—then that experience would certainly be relevant to a spy thriller that takes place in a variety of foreign capitals around the world.
An agent or editor is interested in anything about you that answers the question, “How can I get this author on radio or TV to talk about the book?” Let this be your guide in deciding what goes into your author bio.

Character sketches

We recommend that you include a few pages telling about your characters. We call these character sketches, and they’re valuable because most editors love character-oriented fiction. Be aware that agents and editors rarely ask for character sketches. However, we consider these sketches to be a powerful selling tool and we think you might find them useful.

Create a header for this section that says “Character Sketches.” Devote half a page to a full page to each major character, telling essential backstory, values, ambitions, and story goals. (See Chapters 7 and 12 for more information on these essentials of your characters.) Then tell a bit of the story as it relates to that character. If you get the editor interested in your characters, you’ll radically improve your chances of selling your story.

The dreaded synopsis

Add a new section with the header “Synopsis.” The synopsis is two pages sketching out the main story for your novel. Use present tense, and make each paragraph summarize several scenes, focusing on the main story and leaving out inessential plot threads. Virtually all agents and editors require a synopsis.
  In our experience, writing a synopsis for a proposal is the single most hated task a novelist ever faces. If you don’t like writing synopses, you’re not alone, but you still have to write one. Yes, synopses are often boring. A synopsis uses narrative summary, which is the least vivid kind of storytelling. Get over that and just write it.
Chapter 9 explains in detail how to write a synopsis, and it isn’t as horrible as many writers try to make it. If it’s any comfort, many editors hate reading synopses, but no editor will buy your novel unless you provide one. It’s one of those sad little ironies of life, so grit your teeth and grind it out.

Your marketing plan

Be clear about one thing: Marketing your novel is your publisher’s job. Your job is to write the story. In recent years, however, publishers have come to depend more and more on authors to help with the marketing. You may feel that this is unfair, and it is, but it’s a fact of life. Anything you can do to help market your book should go in the marketing section of your proposal. You can find any number of excellent books on how authors market their work. Be aware that these books provide a vast ocean of options. No publisher expects you to choose more than a few items from this enormous marketing menu, any more than a restaurant expects you to eat more than a few choices from their menu.
You need to do some research on marketing to find out what will work well for you. Are you an extrovert who can tie the topic of your novel to some hot topic for radio or TV interviews? That’s one item on the menu. Are you a blogger with hundreds or thousands of readers lapping up your daily subtle and ironic blog entries? That’s another item on the menu. If you look hard, you’ll discover hundreds or thousands of other ideas on that pesky menu. 
  Choose a few — and only a few — marketing ideas and talk about them in the marketing plan in your proposal. The more your publisher believes you can help in marketing your book, the more keen they’ll be to stretch their own thin marketing budget to cover it, too. This is one area where the rich really do get richer. If you have a great media profile or if you’re already speaking in front of hundreds of thousands of people per year, your publisher will be thrilled to throw great steaming piles of marketing money your way — whereas if you make it clear that you intend to do nada to market your book, your publisher will be happy to double that investment with their own contribution of nada. Think about that and then do some hard thinking on what you can believably say in your marketing plan.
You may feel that you just don’t want to be a marketing weasel. Although we don’t advocate weaselhood, we also believe that sort of attitude is going to hurt you as a writer. Marketing is not intrinsically dirty or weaselish. If you’re as good of a writer as you think you are, then at least tens of thousands of people would love to read your book if only they knew who you were. What is dirty or weaselish about helping those readers find you? Good, honest marketing is about finding the people who want to read you but who don’t yet know you exist. Never be shy about helping those readers find you. They’ll be glad you did, and so will your publisher.

Your writing, including sample chapters (or whole manuscripts!)

A writing sample is essential to both agents and editors. They want to know how well you can write. When an agent responds to your query letter, he’ll tell you how much of a sample he wants to see. Send him that much. Typically, an agent will request a certain number of chapters or a set number of pages. Don’t annoy him by sending more. If he asks for the whole manuscript, then send it all. 
We emphasize here again that if you’ve never yet published a novel, then you shouldn’t query an agent until you have a complete, polished manuscript. If the agent loves your query letter and asks for the whole manuscript, he’s going to be very annoyed to find that you only have 50 pages done. 
  When editors receive a proposal, they typically scan the cover letter and executive summary, and then flip to the sample chapters. If the first paragraph is good, they’ll read the whole first page. If that’s good, they’ll read the first chapter. If that’s good, they’ll read all the chapters. If they’re all excellent, the editor will then read the rest of the proposal in detail. If any part of the sample chapters fails to delight the editor, she’ll stop reading at once and send a quick rejection.
That’s how important your sample chapters are. We can’t emphasize this too heavily. The most important part of your proposal package is your writing sample. The editor needs to love your sample chapters, or your query is as useless as chocolate frosting on an old shoe.
  Don’t place the © symbol or any other type of copyright notice on your sample chapters. Your writing is automatically protected, and including the symbol will reveal that you’re an amateur (and that you don’t trust the publisher or agent to know and respect copyright law).





}
{


Chapter 17

Approaching Agents and Editors

In This Chapter

Looking at the differences between agents and editors

Finding an agent

Finding an editor

When you have a strong manuscript for your novel and all the elements of a solid proposal, you’re ready to get it published. Publishing a novel is a high-risk, high-reward business partnership between you and a publisher. Because the publisher takes most of the risk in the deal, it also wants most of the reward. Two key types of people help you broker a deal — a literary agent and an acquisitions editor. A literary agent is someone you hire to help you sell your novel to a publisher in return for a fixed percentage of your writing income. An acquisitions editor is an employee of a publishing house (usually in the Acquisitions department) whose job is to find authors and buy their manuscripts for publication.
In this chapter, we describe the roles of agents and editors and help you find people who are a good fit for you and your writing.

Defining the Roles of Agents and Editors

You need to understand some crucial differences between agents and editors. Note that both of them have divided loyalties:

  ✓ Acquisitions editors: An editor represents the publisher’s interests in the deal. Her goal is to minimize the risk to her employer and maximize the reward by shifting as much risk to you and paying as little money as you’ll tolerate. The editor’s first loyalty is to the publisher. However, she is not your enemy. She likes you and she likes your writing, and she knows that if you starve to death, you won’t write any more books for her.

✓ Literary agents: An agent represents your interests in the deal. His goal is to minimize your risk and maximize your reward, but not at all costs. The agent has strong incentives to be an honest broker, because he represents many writers. The agent will do best if he brings excellent writers to publishers and negotiates good deals for them. However, agents aren’t out to impoverish the publisher, because tomorrow is another deal.

Finding the Best Agent for You

Agents are optional, so the first decision you need to make is whether you want one. This section explains what an agent does and why hiring an agent may be a good idea.
If you decide that you need an agent, how do you find the right one for you and then get his or her interest? If you’ve got an excellent manuscript, then finding an agent really isn’t that hard. Finding an appropriate agent is a bit harder, but we give you some guidelines in this section. We also tell you how to contact that agent to pitch your novel.

Deciding whether you need an agent

Do you need an agent? That’s a complicated question. An agent does tough, difficult work for you, but he costs you money. The usual fee for a literary agent is 15 percent off the top of your writing income. Here are some common tasks that an agent may do for you:

  ✓ Critique your manuscript and help you polish it (not all agents do this)

  ✓ Work with you to develop a strong proposal (see Chapter 16 for the basics on writing a proposal)

  ✓ Pitch your proposal and manuscript to editors

  ✓ Negotiate your contract

  ✓ Be the bad guy when you have bad news to bring to your publisher (if you’re going to miss a deadline or you have any kind of disagreement with your editor, get your agent involved immediately — that’s his job)

  ✓ Give you career advice, including help on branding yourself and developing marketing skills (not all agents do all this)

  ✓ Check your royalty statements to verify that your publisher is paying you correctly and on time

If you can do all of these things very well yourself and if you’re willing to take time from your writing to do them, then you don’t need an agent. If you see even one item on this list that you can’t do competently, then you probably need an agent. Please remember that the major publishing houses don’t accept unagented queries from authors they don’t know. Many mid-sized publishers don’t, either. 
You can always choose to outsource certain tasks to specialists — freelance editors, contract lawyers, life coaches, branding specialists, marketing experts, or accountants. Those people will also charge you a fee. Only you can decide whether you prefer to pay an agent or a specialist to do those. The advantage of working with an agent is that one person does all the tasks, so he doesn’t need to coordinate with anyone else. In addition, an agent keeps in close touch with editors — he knows what kinds of projects individual editors are looking for, and he can match prospective authors with the right editors. The disadvantage is that he can’t possibly be equally good in all the tasks, and he may be less adept at the very thing you need most.
  Before you start looking for an agent, make sure you’re really ready for one. If you’ve not yet reached the senior level in your writing career (see Chapter 1 for a review of the stages of your career), then you don’t really need an agent because you have nothing to sell. An agent’s job is to sell your work.

Doing your homework on agents first

If you’re ready for an agent, then you need to do your homework to find the right one for you. Most writers will tell you that having no agent is better than having the wrong one. When you work with an agent, you typically sign a representation agreement — a legal contract which spells out your relationship. Some representation agreements have very onerous clauses that make it very hard for you to leave the relationship without losing some of the rights to your work. Other agreements are much more writer-friendly. In all cases, breaking up with an agent is never fun, so it’s best to find the right one for you from the start. In this section, we help you locate literary agents, research them, and make sure you hire the real deal.

Finding candidates who fit your category

Different agents prefer different kinds of writing. Some agents specialize in selling romances. Others favor mysteries. Others, suspense. Some focus completely on religious fiction or young adult or children’s. Many agents are generalists who have a broad range of interests.

Focus your efforts on those agents most likely to be interested in your work. Most of our agent friends have many comical tales of books they’ve been pitched that are thoroughly, outrageously, stupendously inappropriate for them. These pitches usually go straight into the recycling bin.
Before you pitch to an agent, do your homework. Consult the appropriate market guide to find listings of agents. Writer’s Market is the standard market guide, and most agents are listed there and in the subscription-based online database at WritersMarket.com. If you want to find only agents interested in fiction, see Novel & Short Story Writer’s Market. Both of these are large annual reference works that also list publishers and magazines. If you only care about agents, a smaller reference like Guide to Literary Agents might be for you. If you write for a specialized market, such as children/young-adult fiction or Christian fiction, you can find specialized market guides that list agents who focus on those niches. Follow these steps to find your best prospects:

  1.  Define carefully the category for your book.

    Name the major category and any relevant subcategories that apply to your novel. (See Chapter 3 for a discussion of fiction categories.)

  2.  Look through the agent listings in the appropriate market guide and circle or bookmark those that seem particularly interested in the kind of book you’re writing. 

  3.  Make a list of the top ten prospects and check the Web sites of each one.

    Decide which agents looks like the best fit for you and your book.

Researching the agents can take quite a lot of time, but it’s time well spent. Having no agent is far better than having the wrong agent. Your agent will be your employee and your friend for a long time. Breaking up with an agent may be only slightly less painful that breaking up a marriage, so take your time and find the right one.
Avoiding scam artists, charlatans, and other no-goodniksJust about anybody can hang out his shingle as an agent, whether he knows anything about publishing or not. Some of these are scammers, pure and simple. Others have delusions of grandeur and make wild claims about what they can do for you, fully believing their own PR. Others are hard workers who simply don’t know what they’re doing. 
Most well-established agents in the U.S. are members of the Association of Author Representatives (AAR) which has membership requirements designed to screen out wannabe agents. It also has a canon of ethics that’s worth reading just to see what sorts of unethical practices you should be on guard against.

You’re looking for an agent with the following qualities:

  ✓ He is honest

  ✓ He understands how publishing works

  ✓ He has plenty of contacts in the publishing industry

  ✓ He understands every nuance of a publishing contract, knows which parts have much room for negotiation, and can effectively negotiate the terms of the deal to benefit you

  ✓ He earns all or most of his living by being an agent, rather than being a part-timer who has a day job that pays his bills

  ✓ He isn’t so busy with other clients that he has no time for you

Normally, you should be most interested in agents with a well-established record of success in selling the kind of novel you write. Should you work with a brand-new agent who has no track record? That’s always risky, because he may be a scam artist, or delusional, or a rank novice, or merely not cut out for agenting. However, there are certain situations when a new agent is a good bet:

  ✓ Many agents are former editors with years of experience working for publishers. (Some of the best agents we know are former editors.) 

Sometimes an agent leaves a large, well-established agency to start his own business. A brand new agency, freshly started by an experienced editor or agent, has no track record, but the agent may have a long and distinguished record in the publishing world.

  ✓ When a well-established agency hires a new agent as an employee, it typically vets the new agent in advance and provides plenty of support and on-the-job training. This agent is typically young and hungry and can get advice from more experienced agents if difficult issues come up.

  ✓ Occasionally, an agent will quit to take another job in publishing and then realize that his first love is agenting. When he returns to the agent business, he’ll probably hit the ground running.

No matter which agent you’re interested in, you must research his reputation. All reputable agents will give you names of their clients as referrals. Talk to a few and find out what they like and don’t like about their agent. Not every agent works equally well with every client. It never hurts to do an online search using the agent’s name and the word “scam.” Not everything online is golden truth, but the Web is a useful source of info that agents can’t control. You may find the online “Preditors & Editors” list useful. (You can find it with any search engine, if you get the oddball spelling correct.) Talk to other writers and to editors about any agent you’re interested in. Publishing is a small world, and word gets around when an agent isn’t up to snuff.

Don’t work with an agent who charges a “reading fee” to decide whether to work with you. That reading fee too easily becomes an easy way to milk wannabe writers for money instead of doing the hard work of selling novels. Some legitimate agents occasionally charge minor fees for photocopying or mailing expenses — especially when they’re sending large batches of proposals to a variety of publishers via overnight delivery — but most of them don’t. Don’t pay an agent until he’s earned you money.

Contacting agents to pitch your work

When you’ve identified the hot prospects on your list, make an action plan to pitch your work to those agents. You’ll probably pitch only a single manuscript, but bear in mind that you’re looking for long-term literary representation, so the agent will want to know what sort of projects you have in mind for the future.

  You have two main choices in pitching your work to an agent:

  ✓ Pitch it in person at a writing conference. Most writing conferences provide plenty of opportunities for writers to discuss their work with agents.

  ✓ Pitch it cold by querying the agent. Most agents accept queries. The exceptions have full lists and don’t need any more business.

We look at both options in this section.

Getting in touch with agents at writing conferences

Many writing conferences bring in agents as faculty members. Often, you can submit a sample of your work to these agents in advance. Often, you can sign up for an appointment to make a pitch in person. In many cases, you can do both. This is a golden opportunity, because you’re guaranteed to get at least a little personal attention from the agent.
  If you’re submitting written work in advance, prepare the best writing sample or proposal you can. (See Chapter 16 for info on how to polish your sample chapter or proposal. It’s wise to show your submission to a writer friend for critique before you mail it in.) Follow the conference instructions on how to submit your work and on how much to submit.
If you’re planning to make a personal pitch, then you’ll typically get about 15 minutes with the agent. Prepare for this carefully. We highly recommend Michael Hauge’s book, Selling Your Story in 60 Seconds (Michael Wiese Productions), for a very complete guide to making verbal pitches for both novels and screenplays.

Approaching agents through queries

Our experience is that pitching to an agent at a conference is better than cold querying; however, that isn’t always possible, because not all writers can get to a conference, and not all agents go to conferences. You have roughly three levels of contact that you can make when you approach an agent by mail or e-mail, depending on the agent’s submission guidelines:

  ✓ Sending a query letter only

  ✓ Sending a query letter with sample chapters

  ✓ Sending a full manuscript

Traditionally, authors send a query letter first. The query letter is a short letter to an agent to introduce yourself and find out whether he’s interested in hearing more about you and your work. If the query letter catches the agent’s interest, he asks for more information — typically some sample chapters and a synopsis, or a full proposal, or the complete manuscript. Then if he thinks he can sell the manuscript, he offers to represent the author. In the days before e-mail, this often took months.
Luckily, writers and agents now have e-mail, but the process still usually takes months. The reason is that delivery is not the bottleneck; the agent’s schedule is. Legitimate agents work long hours trying to sell the work of their clients. They don’t have much time to deal with the flood of prospective clients. They get to you when they can, if they can.
  There should be no mystery in how to approach an agent. The simple rule is to look at the agent’s Web site to see exactly how he wants to be contacted. He’ll probably tell you what information he wants and how he wants it presented. Follow the instructions precisely — the agent will be both astonished and gratified. If the agent gives you a choice between submitting by e-mail or on paper, you may have slightly better luck with paper. An actual physical piece of paper shows that you’re not just shotgunning out queries to every agent on the planet.
Virtually all agents consider query letters. The few who don’t look at queries are not snooty — they’re just full up with clients and have all the work they can handle. Just as you don’t put gas in a full tank, agents don’t add clients to a full list.
Some agents do prefer to receive part or all of the manuscript (see Chapter 16) along with the query letter, either by e-mail or by mail. If that’s what your target agent wants, then send it.
  Agents take substantially longer to respond to a proposal or full manuscript than to a query letter. If you don’t get an answer back within three or four months, you’re justified in sending a quick e-mail to ask when you should expect a response. Just remember that time spent dealing with you is time your agent isn’t earning money for his clients. And every agent has a lot of writers contacting him every week. He simply can’t afford to spend much time on you. If and when you sign a representation agreement with him, he’ll have a lot more time for you, because then you’ll be his boss. But until then, he doesn’t work for you and he owes you nothing. Respect that.
  Don’t send your manuscript to an agent unless he requests it. If he specifies on his Web site that he wants to see 30 pages with your proposal, don’t send more. If and when he wants the whole manuscript, he’ll tell you, and he’ll specify whether it should be a paper copy or an electronic document.

Editors, the Center of Your  Writing Universe

An acquisitions editor is crucial. You can’t publish a book without an editor.  Although an agent may be optional for some people, an editor isn’t — at least not if you’re working with a traditional royalty-paying publisher. Your editor will typically take a hand in all the following tasks:

  ✓ Discover you from among the great unwashed masses of writers

  ✓ Champion your manuscript to get the publishing committee to accept it

  ✓ Fight for a great cover and a great title

  ✓ Make sure that the back-cover copy tells neither too little nor too much

  ✓ Make sure your book is placed well in the publisher’s catalog and that it’s presented as effectively as possible

  ✓ Talk up your book to the sales team so they’ll be fired up when they go sell it to the various distribution channels

  ✓ Fight to get every possible marketing dollar for your book

  ✓ Make sure you turn in your first draft on time

  ✓ Write a revision letter to you that praises what’s good and points out what you need to improve in a way that motivates you to write your final revisions

  ✓ Track your manuscript through the copy-editing, line-editing, and proof-reading stages

  ✓ Make sure that galley proofs — printed pages of the typeset copy — are sent to you so you can verify that the copy is correct

  ✓ Give the publicity department the information they need to get you any possible TV, radio, newspaper, or magazine interviews

✓ Hold your hand through the process when you feel lost, discouraged, or distraught

  ✓ Do everything possible to make sure the publisher earns a decent return on its investment

  Your editor loves great fiction and she likes you, but her first obligation is to her employer — the publisher. Of course, making you happy and successful is a very important part of making her publisher money. She walks a fine line, and if she sometimes has to get tough with you, it really isn’t personal. Publishing is a business. If you act like you’re in business, you’ll make your editor happy and your relationship will go far more smoothly than if you act like a prima donna artiste who lives above the grungy world of filthy money.
We strongly recommend that you let your agent find the right acquisitions editor. Effective agents have more contacts than you do. However, it’s still possible to sell your book directly to a publisher, especially to smaller ones. It’s worth telling you how to do so, even if you don’t ever do it yourself, because your agent will follow roughly the same steps as you would, and it’s good for you to know what your agent is doing. 
Selling a book almost always happens by persuading an acquisitions editor at a publishing house to be the champion for your novel. How do you (or preferably your agent) find the one editor best suited to champion your book? It comes down to research.
First you decide which publishing houses are appropriate for a book in your category. Then you look for the editor at each house most interested in your category.

Targeting a publishing house

You or your agent will work through the following steps to make a list of  publishers that may be interested in your book:

  1.  Write down the category and subcategory of your book.

    You can’t sell your book unless you know its category, so define the category as precisely as you can. In Chapter 3, we discuss the various fiction categories in depth, precisely so that you write a book you can actually sell.

  2.  List a number of recent books that fall into this category and  subcategory.

  3.  List the publishers that published these books.

4.  Ask around or check any industry sources you have (such as Novel & Short Story Writer’s Market and other market guides) to add other publishers who are interested in your category and subcategory. 

  5.  Check the Web sites of these publishers and cross out any publishers that have gone out of business or have quit publishing in this  category.

Choosing which editor to contact

After you know which publishers may be interested, find one editor at each house who you hope will be the champion for your novel. Again, the Web site of each publisher is your best source of information, but you may also know writers, agents, or other editors who can give you the inside scoop on who loves your category and subcategory.
For each publisher on your list, add the name of the acquisitions editor who seems most appropriate. For smaller publishers, a single editor often handles all acquisitions. For larger publishers, you may find many editors, and you need to read the info on each one to figure out what they like.

Now you have a choice:

  ✓ You (or your agent) can contact your chosen editors by mail or e-mail.

  ✓ You (or your agent) can pitch your novel to the editor in person.

  ✓ Have an industry insider contact the editor on your behalf. (This isn’t all that common, but it does happen to well-networked writers.)
If you have an agent, he’ll handle this and you can just sit back and write while you wait for something to happen. If you don’t have an agent, then it’s up to you to make things happen. Your odds are stronger if you meet an editor at a writing conference than if you send a query directly to a publisher. We discuss querying editors in the next section.

Contacting editors directly

Many years ago, when agents and conferences were rare, writers simply mailed their manuscripts directly to publishing houses and then hoped for the best. The writer knew nothing about the editor, and the editor had no clue who the writer was. The process very rarely works like that these days, even with small publishing houses.

Many editors (especially those working for major publishing houses that pay the big bucks) no longer take any kind of submissions from writers they don’t know, not even simple query letters. In recent years, many mid-sized publishers have quit taking these kinds of submissions also. They have two main reasons  for this:

  ✓ Time: Publishing houses often get thousands or tens of thousands of unsolicited submissions every year, mostly from amateur writers who haven’t read a single book on writing and who can’t be bothered to figure how to submit a manuscript correctly. Over the years, more and more publishers have simply decided not to bother with these unwanted submissions.

  ✓ Risk: After the anthrax mail scare following 9/11, a number of publishers decided that they didn’t want to expose their mailroom staff to the hazards of opening packages from unknown sources. Furthermore, because of computer viruses, some publishers are wary of opening electronic attachments in e-mail from unknown people.If you’re going to contact an editor directly, check the publisher’s Web site and find out exactly how she wants to be contacted (if she wants to be contacted). Follow the instructions to the millimeter. They’ll specify whether the editor wants a query letter, a query package with sample chapters, a proposal, or the full manuscript. They’ll also specify whether she wants a paper or electronic submission.
If you’ve already met the editor at a writing conference or elsewhere and  are following up with sample chapters, a synopsis, a proposal, or a full  manuscript — per the editor’s request — mark your submission as “requested material.” For more information, flip to Chapter 16.

MARGINALIA:

From orders to bargain bins: Distribution  and how it works

Long before your book gets printed, your publisher creates a catalog that covers the coming new  releases  over  a  period  of  three  to  four months, along with a listing of available older titles  (backlist).  Your  publisher  pays  a  sales team to use this catalog to present your book to the buyers for bookstores and bookstore chains. 
The orders come in before your book is even printed, and this helps your publisher decide how many copies to print in the first print run. They print enough to fulfill the preorders and they also print extra, because it’s cheaper to print one big run of books than several small print runs. Even if cost were no issue, publishers  almost  always  outsource  their  printing, and most printers require large print runs. Any books that aren’t immediately ordered go into the warehouse.
Bookstores  have  the  right  to  return  unsold books for credit. This means that they don’t take any risk when they order too many books. When they later decide they can’t sell them all, they just send them back as returns, and the publisher is required to take them.
Ideally, bookstores sell through their first order of your books and then reorder. If your book continues selling well for a long time, then the bookstore may reorder many times, and even-tually your publisher runs out of books in the warehouse. Then they call the printer and your novel goes into a second printing, and a third, and a fourth.
What  if  your  book  doesn’t  sell  well?  Then the  publisher  is  stuck  with  unsold  books  in  the warehouse and with returns from the bookstores. No publisher wants to warehouse those books forever, so when your book has run its course, your publisher tries to liquidate its stock and take the book out of print. The publisher will probably offer you first dibs at the copies, usually at cost. If you don’t buy them all, the publisher sells them to a liquidator at a small fraction of the original list price. If you’ve seen the bargain bins in bookstores, now you know why those prices are so insanely low.
Your contract has paragraphs that deal with all these issues. Most publishers hold back some of your royalties as a reserve against the inevitable returns (which are negative sales that you deserve no royalties for).
Your contract specifies an advance payment to you. This is not free money; it’s an advance against royalties. If your book doesn’t earn out its  advance,  your  publisher  eats  the  loss.  
If your book does earn out, then you get residual income periodically, based on the royalty rate for sales of your book.
If all this sounds complicated, that’s because it is. No genius has ever figured out how to pre-dict which books will be winners and which, losers. Publishers create contracts that try to minimize their risks and maximize their rewards. Agents negotiate hard to shift some of that risk back to the publisher and some of the reward back to you. That’s why your contract is complex. That’s why you probably need an agent.


}
{

Part V

The Part of Tens

In this part . . .
In this classic For Dummies part, you find a couple of quick-reference chapters to help you through the  process of writing and selling compelling fiction. We cover ten steps to designing and analyzing your story and ten reasons publishers reject novels.

Chapter 18

Ten Steps to Analyzing Your Story

In This Chapter

Creating your storyline and three-act structure

Making character definitions, sketches, and charts

Writing long and short synopses

Spelling out the scenes

Great fiction happens by design, not by chance. You can give your story some sense of order and purpose before you write it or after. The important thing is that at some point, you must work out the design of your story and then shape or reshape your story so your design helps you reach your main goal: giving your reader a powerful emotional experience.
In this chapter, we describe ten steps in Randy’s Snowflake method, a popular method for analyzing the design of a story. These steps help you start simple and add complexity in stages until you have a beautiful design. The steps are in order from highest level to lowest level. Also, Randy finds it wise to alternate between character and plot development; so steps 2, 4, 6, and 8 involve plot, and steps 3, 5, and 7 involve character. This keeps the story development  balanced.
You can apply the Snowflake ideas no matter which creative paradigm you use — a creative paradigm is just a method of getting to a first draft. The Snowflake is a method of analyzing a story. So if you use the Snowflake or outliner creative paradigms, you probably want to apply the Snowflake analysis before you write your first draft. But if you use the seat-of-the-pants or edit-as-you-go creative paradigms (see Chapter 4 for an explanation of these common creative paradigms), you write your first draft first, without any design. Then you can use the Snowflake method to analyze your story to help you edit it. (For more information on the Snowflake method, visit Randy’s Web site at www.snowflakemethod.com.)
  None of the steps in the Snowflake method are magic. None of them are required before you write your story. You can do them in any order you like. You can even do them backward from Step 10 to Step 1. The steps are just tools to help you design your story and to analyze it. Use what works for you and ignore the rest.

Step 1: Write Your Storyline

First, write out your storyline — a summary of your story in one sentence. (See Chapter 8 for a detailed explanation of how to write a storyline, with many examples.) You’ll use your storyline to get the interest of your agent or editor. Your agent will use your storyline to sell your book to a publisher. Your editor will use your storyline to sell your idea to publishing committees and sales teams. Your storyline will be used at every point in the selling chain —  right down to your readers, who’ll use your storyline to explain to their friends why your book is so cool. Your storyline will even benefit you — it’ll keep you focused during the editing phase, so you always know what’s essential to your story and what isn’t.
  The storyline for Randy’s first novel was, “A physicist travels back in time to kill the apostle Paul.” That’s only 11 words, but it sold a lot of copies for him at book signings and elsewhere.
  In your storyline, focus on the central conflict. Don’t name any characters; instead, tell something interesting about the one or two or three characters who are most important to your story. The storyline should be 25 words or less, and you get extra credit if you can do it in less than 15.

Step 2: Write Your Three-Act Structure

Expand your storyline to a three-act structure — a single, one-paragraph summary that describes the high-level structure of your story. (See Chapter 8 for full details on the three-act structure of a story, which is a widely-used concept in the publishing industry.) If you’ve already written your story, you’ll find that analyzing the three-act structure helps you understand the big chunks of your story better.
We recommend that you write your one-paragraph summary using five  sentences, in this simple pattern:

  ✓ Sentence 1: Describe the story backdrop and tell about the lead characters. (See Chapter 6 for details on the story backdrop.)

  ✓ Sentence 2: Describe the beginning quarter of your story, culminating in a major disaster that forces your lead character to fully commit to his story goal. (See Chapter 7 for details about characters and story goals.)

  ✓ Sentence 3: Describe the second quarter of the story, leading up to a second major disaster at the midpoint of the story.

✓ Sentence 4: Describe the third quarter of the story, ending in your third and worst disaster. This disaster will force your lead character to commit to a final confrontation.

  ✓ Sentence 5: Explain the final confrontation and how it resolves the story.  A story has a beginning, a middle, and an end, and each of these is one of the acts in your three-act structure. Act 1 (the beginning) covers roughly a quarter of your story. It ends in a disaster that leads directly to Act 2 (the middle). Act 2 is quite long — roughly half the total length of the book, and it needs a major disaster at roughly its midpoint to prevent a sagging middle in your story. Act 2 ends in a third disaster that leads directly to Act 3 (the end). In Act 3, you show a final confrontation and resolve all of the story threads.

Step 3: Define Your Characters

For each major character in your story, write down the following basic  information:

  ✓ Name: Write the name of your character (or the character’s role, such as “Hero” or “Villain,” if you haven’t figured out names yet).

  ✓ Ambition: What one abstract thing does the character want most?

  ✓ Story goal: What one concrete thing does your character believe will enable her to achieve her ambition?

  ✓ Conflict: What prevents your character from reaching her story goal?

  ✓ Epiphany: How will your character change or what will she learn in the course of the story?

  ✓ One-sentence summary: If this story were mainly about this character, what would the storyline be?

  ✓ One-paragraph summary: If this story were mainly about this character, what would the three-act structure be?

If you’ve already written your story and you can’t answer all of these questions, that’s a strong indicator of a weakness in your characters. Now is a great time to solve that weakness, before you plunge into editing scenes.
  Every character in your story believes that he or she is the lead character. Write your one-sentence summary and one-paragraph summary for each character as if he or she really were the center of the universe. This is critical for creating three-dimensional characters. Never create a character who exists solely to make some other character’s story work. (For more on creating characters, flip to Chapter 7.)

Step 4: Write a Short Synopsis

In Step 2, you write a one-paragraph summary that describes the three-act structure of your story. Now expand each sentence in this paragraph into a full paragraph of its own. You should get about one full page, which we call a short synopsis. This will be somewhat shorter than the normal two-page synopsis for your query that we describe in Chapter 9.
  Your short synopsis should be in present tense, and it must summarize your story briefly. Focus on the high points here. You can’t describe every scene. You can ultimately use this short synopsis to write your synopsis for your  proposal, but the main purpose of the short synopsis is to help you understand your story structure better by adding detail to the paragraph of Step 2.

Step 5: Write Character Sketches

For each important character defined in Step 3, write a character sketch in one paragraph or a few paragraphs (up to a page for the most important characters). Summarize the character’s backstory. Explain his values, ambitions, and story goals to show how they all fit together into the story. The character sketch is immensely valuable, mainly by focusing on back story and values, and adding details to the front story. Also, the character sketch fills in a lot of details missing from Step 3 that are critical to understanding your characters. 
Notice that you are alternating between plot analysis and character analysis. We’ve found that by alternating between them, you make both stronger. 
  Editors love to read character sketches. If you write these in complete paragraphs in a way designed to arouse interest in each character, you  can integrate these character sketches directly into your proposal.

Step 6: Write a Long Synopsis

In Step 4, you write a one-page short synopsis that summarizes your story briefly. Now expand each paragraph in that short synopsis into several paragraphs (up to a page) to create a long synopsis that now captures all the high-level details of your story. This will probably run four or five pages, so it’s somewhat longer than the normal synopsis for your proposal that we describe in Chapter 9.

Again, you are adding detail in a systematic way, first on plot, and then character, and then back on plot again. This principle of alternation helps keep you engaged and keeps your story balanced between character and plot.
  Your long synopsis should be in present tense, and you can afford to get a lot more detailed now. You have room for a paragraph or even two or three on all the sequences of scenes in your story. Glossing over the unimportant scenes here is okay, but you should capture the important scenes. The purpose of this synopsis is to make sure you know how your story works. You may ultimately use it to write the synopsis for your proposal, or you may never show it to a soul. Your goal is to fix those pesky logic plot problems in a simple document that you can easily scan in just a few minutes.

Step 7: Create Your Character Bible

For each important character in your story, create a bible that details everything you need to remember. (See Chapter 12 for what goes into a character bible and why you need one.) This is the place to save every bit of information that you need. Some of the obvious things that go into this bible are

  ✓ Census data, such as name, birth date, and so on

  ✓ Physical descriptions, including hair color, eye color, height, weight, and scars

  ✓ Physical and mental disabilities

  ✓ Education, work skills, and special talents

  ✓ Fears, hopes, and dreams

  ✓ Backstory (your character’s history)

  There’s no complete list of features that you need to track for your characters. Focus on the character traits that are important for your kind of story. Remember that the purpose of your bible is to prevent you from making rookie mistakes like having a character with green eyes on page 17 and gray eyes on page 384. You need to know far more about your characters than you tell your readers. 

Step 8: Make Your Scene List

Write a scene list, which gives you a short summary of every scene in your story. (See Chapter 9 for an explanation of a scene list and how to create one.) In Steps 4 and 6, you create short and long synopses of your story, but  neither of these covers every scene in your story.

The purpose of a scene list is to let you rearrange your scenes and see how that affects your story. If you do this before you write your story, then the scene list helps you fill in the missing gaps in the story. If you do it after you write your story, the scene list shows you the full story in one large view, and you can make decisions about which scenes are pulling their weight and which aren’t helping the story.

If you are a Snowflaker or an Outliner (see Chapter 4 if you’re not sure what your creative paradigm is), then by the end of this step, you have enough information to write your book proposal. Should you do so? That depends. A published novelist almost always writes a query or proposal, sells the book, and then writes the manuscript. But novelists who haven’t yet sold their first book almost never can do that, because agents and editors want to see proof that you can finish a novel before they’ll buy it. The proof that they want is a finished, polished draft of your novel. No publisher can afford to get burned by an amateur writer who can’t finish a story. (See Chapter 16 for details on writing queries.)
The bottom line is that if you’re a published writer, then it makes good sense to take what you have, write a query or proposal, and start submitting it to agents or editors. Even if you’re not published, writing a proposal now is good practice. You may find it useful to write a proposal and take it to a writing conference. A good proposal may get an agent excited about you and your writing. Just don’t expect to make a sale until you have a polished manuscript to back up your proposal.
  Many writers keep their scene lists on index cards so they can shuffle them around to find the best order. Other writers prefer to create their scene lists on a computer. Randy has long preferred using a spreadsheet for his scene lists, because a spreadsheet lets you

  ✓ Easily move scenes around, edit them, add new scenes, and delete unneeded ones

  ✓ Make copies so that you can play around with new combinations without fear of losing your work

  ✓ Easily keep track of the number of words in each scene; if your manuscript has too many words (or too few), then you can see the effect of dropping or adding scenes on your total word count

Step 9: Analyze Your Scenes

In Step 8, you create a scene list. If you don’t have a first draft of your manuscript yet, you may be itching to start writing. You’re free to do that. But if you want to do a bit more thinking about your scenes, or if you already have a first draft written, the next step is to analyze your scenes. For each scene in the story, write down the following:

  ✓ Type of scene: Is it a proactive scene or a reactive scene? (See Chapters 10 and 14 for a discussion of these two main kinds of scenes.) A proactive scene has the structure goal-conflict-setback. A reactive scene has the structure reaction-dilemma-decision.

  ✓ POV character: Who is the point-of-view character in the scene? Are you writing in first person, third person, objective third person, or some other viewpoint? Are you writing in past tense or present tense?

  ✓ Setting: Where is the scene taking place? What is the date and time? Which characters play a role in the scene?

  ✓ Beginning: If this is a proactive scene, what’s the goal? If it’s a reactive scene, what’s the reaction?

  ✓ Middle: If this is a proactive scene, what’s the conflict? If it’s a reactive scene, what’s the dilemma?

  ✓ End: If this is a proactive scene, what’s the setback? If it’s a reactive scene, what’s the decision?

  ✓ Other comments: What special information do you want to remember to put into this scene (if you haven’t written it yet)? What should you remember to research or fix in this scene (if you’ve written it already)?
You don’t have to analyze your scenes before you write your story. That’s perfectly fine. Get it written! But later on, after it’s written, you still need to get it right. The preceding questions are precisely the ones you’ll need to ask to help you get it right. 

Step 10: Write and Edit Your Story

This step applies only if you don’t yet have a first draft of your manuscript. If you’ve been using the Snowflake method to help you design your story, you’re now ready to write. Go for it! Start writing whichever scene interests you most.
  Remember one thing — at any instant in time, you should be in either creative mode or editing mode. Don’t edit it before you write it down. That’s called writer’s block, and it’s a perfect prescription for getting nothing done. Just write. Write fast. Write hard. Get into the skin of your POV character, become that character, and drill out some words.

You can edit your first draft whenever you like. Randy normally starts out each writing session by editing whatever he wrote in the previous session. This gives him some momentum — by the time he finishes editing the previous scene, he’s up to speed and eager to write the next one. Peter likes to write an entire chapter and then edit it. If you’re an Edit-As-You-Go writer, then you may prefer to write a single page and then edit it. That’s fine. But write it first before you edit.
As you get into your story, you may find that the characters have come alive and are refusing to follow your carefully constructed plan. That’s perfectly okay. You are the god of the universe you’re creating, but you have the right to grant some measure of free will to your characters. When they exercise that free will, they won’t do what you expected; they’ll do something better. Go with that.
If your story starts diverging from your design, what do you do? The answer is simple: Redesign! Randy normally tweaks his complete Snowflake design after writing about a quarter of his manuscript. This takes only an hour or two of effort, and it’s worth the time to examine the consequences of those pesky characters who insist on going their own way. Randy also does a redesign at the midpoint of his novels and another redesign just before writing the ending. You’re free to redesign your story as often as you need to in order to get your first draft written.

MARGINALIA:

The software side of story design

Knowing what to do is one thing; actually getting it done and keeping track of where you put your story is another. Randy spent many years in a day job as a computational physicist, and he’s developed a software product, Snowflake Pro, that makes it easy to work through the ten steps of the Snowflake method. Snowflake Pro runs on all major computer operating systems —  Windows, Mac, and Linux.
The program helps you keep track of all those pesky storylines, disasters, characters, values, ambitions, story goals, synopses, and scenes. And Snowflake Pro has a nice feature at the end: Press a button, and it writes a skeleton of your book proposal for you. The ten steps of the Snowflake ask you to create much of the  information  you  need  for  your  proposal, so  Snowflake  Pro  gathers  all  those  pieces together and writes out an RTF document that you  can  load  into  any  word  processor.  The software leaves slots open for you to complete any  missing  pieces  of  the  proposal  in  your word processor. You can find out more about Snowflake Pro on Randy’s Web site at www.snowflakemethod.com.


}
{

Chapter 19

Ten Reasons Novels Are Rejected

In This Chapter

Targeting your book 

Strengthening your writing craft

Delivering a powerful emotional experience


Publishers give many reasons they don’t buy a particular book. Sometimes a book is fine, but the time just isn’t right for it. If that’s the case, you can’t do anything but write another book while you wait for the time to be right for the one you wrote.
In other cases, the time is right but the book just isn’t. That’s a hard, hard thing to hear. Yet if that’s the case, you don’t have to wait passively for some mythical “right time” that may never come. You need to figure out what’s wrong so you can fix it and resubmit it somewhere else.
If you’ve had your novel rejected multiple times, go ahead and take some time to lick your wounds. We’ve been there. Getting rejected stings. It’s also perfectly normal. Jack London got rejected 600 times before he ever sold a thing. Jack scraped himself off the floor, figured out how to improve, and went on to become a pretty darn good writer.
First let’s talk about who has the power to reject your work. If you’ve read Chapter 17, you know that your first step is usually to find an agent. Most agents get dozens to hundreds of queries each week, and must reject most of them. Once you’ve got an agent, he’ll submit your work to acquisitions editors at publishing houses. The job of such editors is to sift hundreds of queries, proposals, and manuscripts and reject most of them. Rarely, an acquisitions editor decides to champion a project and takes it to the publishing committee. The committee has the final word, and it may reject your work, too, but your odds are actually pretty good if your project makes it to the committee.

It’s clumsy and awkward to refer to “agents, acquisitions editors, and publishing committees” throughout this chapter. So we’ll simply use the word “editor,” and you can mentally substitute in all the others. Most rejections happen quickly, when the editor spots a show-stopper in your submission. In this chapter, we look at a number of common reasons for rejections, looking at them roughly in order of how fast the editor decides to say no. 
  Listen carefully when an editor rejects your work. Don’t argue with her. She knows her business, which is to champion books her publishing house can sell at a profit. If she doesn’t strongly believe that her house can sell your book, then she can’t do much for you, because much of publishing is making a leap of faith and taking risks. That works best when the editor has loads of faith. 
  So listen to the words you hear in those painful rejections and see what you can take from them. (In Chapter 1, we tell Randy’s story of selling his first novel. His breakthrough came when he realized that he could write a new novel that met all the objections he heard from one particular publisher. That publisher ultimately bought three of his novels.) 

The Category Is Wrong 

  Editors normally have three reactions when you mention a particular category: They love the category, they’re neutral about it, or they really hate it. (See Chapter 3 for a discussion of the many categories and subcategories in fiction.) 
Your novel will do best with an editor champion who absolutely, positively, deliriously loves the category you’re writing. An enthusiastic editor is one of the main reasons novels succeed.
Suppose you make an appointment with an editor at a conference. You sit down and she asks about your novel. You start out by telling her you have a paranormal romance novel. She interrupts to say, “Sorry, but I don’t do romance at all. I only look at thrillers.” Now what do you do?
First, apologize. You just wasted her time and yours by making an appointment with the wrong editor. You should’ve done your homework better, and now she has a 15-minute block of unproductive time.
Second, ask her advice. You may say, “Listen, since this obviously isn’t a book for you, maybe I can just get your advice on who might be interested in a story like this one.” She may say no, and that’s her right. However, you have nothing to lose by asking. She may say yes and then ask you to tell her a bit about the story. If she does, give her the exact same storyline that you already planned to deliver. But now she doesn’t have to worry about possibly having to reject you (she’s already done that); she’s free to give you friendly advice as an industry professional. If the storyline is good, she just might say, “Wow, that’s actually not a bad story idea,” and direct you to a couple of editors who may be interested. If you don’t yet have an agent, she might point you to one who’s suitable.
Of course, next time you make an appointment with an editor, do your homework and choose one who likes your category. Conferences almost always tell you what categories their faculty are interested in. If you don’t bother to read this information, you’re hurting yourself and wasting the time of the editors or agents you make appointments with.

Bad Mechanics and Lackluster Writing

The first thing an editor actually sees is either your query letter or the cover letter on your proposal. If this has mechanical errors or is badly written, she knows she doesn’t need to look further. That’s an instant rejection and she can move on to the next project.
Many editors often look at the sample chapters second. If the writing is truly wretched, the editor knows it within a few words. If it’s merely mediocre, that’s clear within a paragraph or two. If you use too many adverbs, have weak style, write dull dialogue, or show weak action, those all show up in the first page or two. Editors have finely tuned reading instincts, and they can say no to most sample chapters they see within a very few pages. 
  Great craft is critical to getting published. Do yourself a huge favor and polish your work as well as possible, and then get a second opinion before you send it to an editor. This is one reason we strongly recommend getting an agent first. A good agent makes sure that your work is up to snuff before he submits it to editors. Of course, before you send your work to an agent, it’s a really good idea to get it critiqued by a strong writer or a freelance editor.

The Target Reader Isn’t Defined

Your proposal for your novel normally defines a target reader. If you don’t include this in your proposal, then the editor may well assume you don’t know. That puts the onus on her to figure out what sort of person would be interested in your book. If she doesn’t think there are enough of that kind of person to justify publishing your book, then you’re out of luck.
If you hear anything like this from an editor, then read Chapter 3 for info on defining your audience and your target reader. Spend some time thinking about this. Just being a good writer isn’t enough; you also need to be a good writer who connects with readers. Publishers aren’t in business to make you happy or to print copies of books they can’t sell. They’re in business to earn money in a business partnership with you. If you can show them that you mean business — enough to tell them who your customers are — then you stand a chance of forming that partnership.

The Story World Is Boring

If your personal life is dull, what do you do? Your quickest solution is to get out more — out of the house, out of your routine, maybe take a vacation. In other words, change your environment. The story world for your novel is the environment for your characters. If your story world is boring, your characters will be bored, and so will your reader. What’s the solution? Change their environment.

You have two main avenues of attack for improving your story world:

  ✓ Know it better. You may need to do more research. If you know your story world intimately, you can’t help but show the parts of it you love best to your reader. Chapter 6 covers researching your novel’s story world.

  ✓ Show it better. If you know your story world well, then the problem may be that your descriptions of it don’t shine. Do you have too little description? Then add more. Do you have enough? Then buff it up by showing it through the eyes of your POV characters, focusing on the elements that trigger a powerful emotional experience in your character. See Chapters 10 and 15 for specific tips on integrating description directly into  your story.
For more advice on building your story world, read Chapter 6 and work through the exercises.

The Storyline Is Weak

Every great story can be reduced to a great storyline — a single sentence that hooks your target reader. (See Chapter 8 for details on storylines.)
  Editors are always looking for strong storylines. Here’s why:

  ✓ A good storyline is a sign that you’re a professional writer, not an amateur. Editors prefer working with pros.

  ✓ If you have a good storyline, then the editor knows she can sell it to her publishing committee (and to every other person in the selling chain). If you have a weak storyline, then she’s going to have to spend valuable time helping you craft one.

✓ If you have a good storyline, the manuscript you submit is likely to be on target. It probably won’t need massive editing. The editor probably won’t have to return it to you as “unacceptable.” No editor ever wants to tell an author that the final draft for a contracted novel is unacceptable, but sometimes it just is.
If your storyline is weak, think hard about your story. Figure out what it’s really about. Work through the exercise in Chapter 8 on creating your storyline. If you need help, recruit some of your writing buddies. Take time every few months to rethink your storyline. The more you think about it, the better you’ll understand your story.

The Characters Aren’t Unique  and Interesting

The surest way to an editor’s heart is to give her a unique, compelling, fascinating character. Remember that your reader is going to be paying money for the privilege of spending several hours with your characters. You wouldn’t pay to hang out with boring people.If you get any hint from an editor that your characters aren’t interesting, then you have some work ahead of you:

  ✓ Make sure you understand what makes a strong character. Characters need backstories, values, ambitions, and story goals, and they shouldn’t be stereotypes (read Chapters 7 and 12 for details).

  ✓ Get an opinion on your characters from one of your writing buddies or from a professional freelance editor. They’ll see things you miss.

  ✓ Review each scene of your novel to make sure that you’ve identified a point-of-view (POV) character for each scene. Also, verify that your reader can easily tell who the POV character is.

  ✓ Make sure that you’re putting your reader solidly inside the heart and mind of each POV character. For more information, read Chapter 10.

The Author Lacks a Strong Voice

Many agents and editors say that the very first thing they look for in an author is a strong voice. Voice has everything to do with how unique and interesting your writing is. We don’t say much in this book about voice, because most authors eventually find their voice on their own without any help from books or coaches.

How do you find your voice? By writing. Writing a lot. And reading. Reading a lot. Time and experience are the most important ingredients in developing your voice. Should you try writing a whole full-length novel before your voice is fully developed? Sure, go right ahead. You don’t develop your voice by just doing exercises. You develop your voice by writing — for real, without a net.
If you’re hearing that your voice isn’t strong enough yet, then be encouraged. This means that you have most of the ingredients for a good novel in place —  good story world, characters, plot, and theme. All you’re missing is that magic oomph that will make you different from every other fiction writer out there. If you’re destined to be a fiction writer, then you’ll find that magic oomph. Just keep writing until you sell. You may be closer than you think.

The Plot Is Predictable

When you hear that your plot is predictable, you need to identify carefully the underlying reason. A predictable plot is a symptom; cure the disease, and the symptom will go away. Here are the most common reasons your plot may be predictable:

  ✓ Weak research: If you haven’t researched your story world well enough, then you’ll fall back on what “everybody knows,” which usually is what everybody learned from watching thousands of hours of TV. And TV is a bad way to learn about cops, or doctors, or scientists, or priests, or just about anything. TV is Cliché City. The solution? Do more research on your story world. Find out so much that you won’t rely on the obvious plot twists you learned from TV. You’ll come up with something new.

  ✓ Weak values for your characters: Your characters become unpredictable when they have a conflict in their underlying values — the core truths they believe about the world. If your characters are predictable, then you can solve this by giving them values that conflict, forcing them into tough moral dilemmas. They’ll make choices that your reader can’t predict, because they’ll make choices that you can’t predict. Your characters will start acting like they have a mind of their own. They do. Let them. Be surprised. (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of character values.)

  ✓ Weak setbacks in your scenes: When your character hits a setback, he’s forced into a dilemma. This needs to be a real dilemma with no good options. If you leave him any good options, then both he and the reader are going to see it — and the reader will probably see it first. To solve this, strengthen your setbacks. Box in your character tighter. Reduce his options. (See Chapter 9 for a discussion of setbacks.)

The Theme Is Overbearing

Nobody likes a sermon in a novel. When you design a novel that’s nothing but a theme sliced, diced, and spliced into a story, it’s going to reek like last week’s wallaby stew. Your reader doesn’t want a sermon, and therefore no publisher will buy one.
If your theme is overpowering the other elements of your fiction, then you need to seriously rethink your story. Read Chapter 11 for info on what a theme is and how it emerges naturally from a story. Then do the following:

  1.  Analyze each character, focusing especially on the character’s values, ambitions, and goals (Chapter 12 provides some tools to help).

    Do these seem designed specially to illustrate the theme of your novel? If so, change them. Start by giving every character values that conflict. This is often the easiest way to turn a flat character into a living one. Then see whether you can change some of your characters’ ambitions and story goals so they aren’t so obviously tied to your theme.

  2.  Rewrite each scene so that it reflects your new and improved  characters.

    This may spiral out of control, and you may find the story getting away from you. Good! It’s about time. If you had the story under your control the entire time you were writing it, then your characters were not in control. You need to give them some rein and see where they take you. If they’re living, breathing, honest-to-God people, then they won’t be nearly so interested in your theme as you are. They’ll be too busy find-ing ways to satisfy their ambitions and story goals.

The Book Fails to Deliver a Powerful Emotional Experience

  Writing fiction is about giving your reader a powerful emotional experience. You do this by showing your POV character having a powerful emotional experience and then convincing your reader that he or she is that character.What’s the solution? That depends on why things are breaking down. Here are the most likely causes of the problem:

  ✓ Low stakes: If your characters are playing for low stakes, the emotive level is going to be low. Raise the stakes on your story question and your characters suddenly start getting serious about the story they’re in. Your reader will follow. See Chapter 6 on the story backdrop and the story question to get some ideas on raising the stakes. How important is your story question to your characters? To how many characters is it important?

  ✓ Flat characters: A character can have a powerful emotional experience only if she’s real. That means she needs her own values, ambitions, and story goals — hers, not yours. If you’ve cooked her up just to hold a place in the plot so that your story works out the way you want it to, then she’s going to be flat as paint. Read through Chapters 7 and 12 to juice her up with a life of her own.

  ✓ Telling, not showing: When you tell your reader about an emotional experience, your reader doesn’t experience it. You must show that emotional experience. There’s no better way to do that than by mixing action, dialogue, interior monologue, interior emotion, and description, as we explain in Chapters 10 and 15.
