WRITING IN THE DARK

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I want to thank Jennifer Barnes and john Edward Lawson for having faith in this book. They're very special people. I also want to thank my fabulous agent Cherry Weiner for her guidance and friendship.

DEDICATION

This one’s for Lawrence Block, whose columns and books on writing fiction taught me more than any class ever could.

PREFACE

ENTER FREELY AND OF YOUR OWN WILL.

PART ONE.

Why I Write Horror.

“So, why do you write horror?”
It's a question I've thought about a lot over the years, and it might surprise you to learn that I don't have a definite answer—or at least not a single answer. I can, however, pinpoint specific moments in my life that led me to my love affair with all things dark and wonderful.
When I was a child—maybe four or five—my dad would sit me on his lap and read nonfiction books about dinosaurs to me. I couldn't read their names, but I learned to recognize the words by their shapes, almost as if they were pictographs. I was fascinated by the idea that these massive monsters had been real, that they had actually existed and might have walked the same ground as where my house now stood. More than real life monsters, they were also like ghosts—spirits of creatures who'd died long ago but still lingered, in the human imagination if nowhere else.
Around the same time, I watched Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man with my parents. My mom and dad didn't censor what I watched back then. If they watched it, I did, too. I was fascinated by the idea that these two monsters—both of which I knew starred in their own movies—not only inhabited the same universe but could actually meet, interact, and—best of all—battle to the death. After the movie, my dad taught me a simple way to draw the Wolf Man, and I still remember how to do it to this day, fifty years later.
When I was five, a friend showed me a book by Norman Bridwell, of Clifford the Big Red Dog fame. The book was How to Train Your Monster, and it was a guide for keeping a monster as your pet. I was desperate to have this book, and I traded my friend a bunch of baseball cards for it. (To this day, it’s still one of the best deals I ever made.) In first grade, I entered a contest to win tickets to see a high school play called The Ghoul Friend. I really wanted to see the play—after all, it had ghoul in the title—and when I won, I was ecstatic. The play turned out to be a Scooby-Doo-type story with no real monsters in it, but the costumes were great. 
As I grew, so too did my love of horror. I watched the weekly local horror movie program on TV—Shock Theater with Dr. Creep—religiously. I read Eerie Publications’ black-and-white horror comics, magazines with lurid, blood-soaked covers and titles like Tales of Voodoo, Terror Tales and Tales from the Tomb. And I devoured Warren Publishing’s horror magazines such as Creepy, Eerie, Vampirella, and the monster kid’s bible, Famous Monsters of Filmland. I loved DC Comics like House of Mystery and House of Secrets, and Marvel Comics like Tomb of Dracula and Werewolf by Night. For my birthday and Christmases, I asked for monster toys instead of bikes or sports equipment, and the first horror story I wrote was a comic-book version of King Kong vs, Godzilla—a film which I knew existed but had never seen—drawn on a stenographer's pad.
I started reading a lot of UFO and cryptid nonfiction books, my imagination captivated by the idea that these beings might actually exist. The book that had the most effect on me was john A. Keel’s The Mothman Prophecies, especially the last line, a quote attributed to Charles Fort: “If there is a universal mind, must it be sane?" That idea haunted me, and it's formed the basis of much of my horror fiction throughout my life.
As I headed toward my teenage years, I read about Richard Matheson’s I Am Legend, and Anne Rice's Interview with the Vampire, and I was thrilled to discover my local library had both. When I was in fifth grade, my father took me to see jaws, and I was traumatized by the film's unbearable suspense. I've had a love-hate relationship with sharks ever since. In seventh grade a friend told me about this really good book he was reading—Salem’s Lot by Stephen King. I got a copy and had never been so captivated by a story. Several years later, I would read an interview with King in the black-and-white horror magazine Dracula Lives, and I'd realize being a writer was something a person could choose to do, and I could choose it as well if I wanted.
In high school, right before Thanksgiving break one year, the faculty herded the students into the gym and showed us Psycho while they all went outside and smoked. I couldn't understand what the hell the teachers were thinking—Psycho wasn't exactly a family-friendly, holiday—themed movie—but I loved it. After high school I got to see the best (and not-so-best) eighties horror films in the theater, and when videotape players came on the market, I rented and watched every horror movie I could find.
I started writing seriously with the goal of becoming published when I was eighteen. By this time, I was reading more fantasy and science fiction than horror, and while I tried my hand at all three genres when it came to short fiction, for some reason I only tried to write fantasy and science fiction at novel length. This was during the legendary 1980's horror boom in publishing, and I sometimes wonder what might’ve happened if I'd written a horror novel back then and sent it off to an agent or editor. I went to college, eventually graduating with a bachelor's in education and a master's in English. I continued writing novels and stories and racking up rejections. More and more I began to gravitate toward writing horror at short length, although I still didn't attempt to write a horror novel. I’m not sure why. Sometimes I think that I loved horror so much that I was too intimidated to attempt a novel, afraid that I might mess it up.
I began teaching college writing part-time to support myself while I wrote. I found Ramsey Campbell's excellent collection Alone with the Horrors in the library of a college where I was teaching, and after reading it from cover to cover, I gained a better understanding of how to write short horror fiction, and my stories improved immeasurably. By this point, I began selling short stories to small-press markets, and my first professionally published piece—and the one where I first found my horror voice—was "Mr. Punch," which appeared in the anthology YoungB1ood. By this point, the earliest form of online communities began to emerge, and I joined the genie network, where many writers of Scifi slash Fantasy slash Horror hung out. I got to read the posts of professional writers and interact with them online, but while I enjoyed them all, the horror writers felt the most like my people. We seemed to look at the world in similar ways and loved the same books and films. 
I began going to SF conventions and speaking on panels. This led me to join a writers‘ group with the novelists Dennis L. McKiernan and Lois McMaster Bujold. I got an agent, thanks to a recommendation from Dennis, and he began shopping around some of my fantasy novels, but with no luck. I continued selling short fiction-most often horror—to both pro and small-press markets, and I began to wonder if I could take the kind of “Tim Waggoner" horror story I'd developed and write a novel-length work of fiction using the same approach. By this time-my early thirties—I was reading more horror than anything else, and after reading Douglas Clegg's You Come When I Call You and Tom Piccirilli's A Lower Deep, I felt I had a grasp on how to write a novel-length Tim Waggoner horror story. The result was The Harmony Society, the first of many horror novels I would go on to publish.
I'm in my fifties now, and I've published close to fifty novels and seven short story collections, a majority of them horror. I've been a two-time finalist for the Shirley Jackson Award, and I've been nominated for the Bram Stoker Award three times and won once. I'm not sure what kind of standing I have in the horror community. I've had people refer to me as an elder statesman of horror, and while I hope I'm not too elder yet, I appreciate the compliment. So one answer to why I write horror is that I've loved it all my life, and I grew into the writer I am just as I've grown into the man I've become—bit by bit, moment by moment. But there are darker reasons, too.
My mother was a depressive agoraphobic, and she never received treatment for her mental illness. She would have fainting spells once a month or so, and to this day I still jump when I hear a loud noise in the house, afraid that someone has fallen. My parents, without really meaning to, taught me and my siblings that the world is a dangerous place, always out to get you, always to be feared. When I was nine, I almost drowned (which is why water figures in my horror stories so often), and a few months later, my great uncle—who was like a second father to me—died suddenly. I was plunged into a two-year depression during which I struggled to come to terms with death. There's a scene in the movie Earth vs. the Spider where we're shown the destruction of a town caused by a giant arachnid. We're shown a blonde-haired boy with glasses (who looked a lot like me) crying, the only survivor. I realized then that the monsters I loved so much killed people, and that they made the survivors feel the same way I felt about losing my uncle. I've never looked at monsters the same way since. Nuclear war with Russia (then the Soviet Union) was still a very real possibility, and more of my older relatives died, one after the other. The Vietnam War was still going on when I was a child, and when I was a teenager, the Reagan years came along with the attendant economic hardships. And, of course, AIDs arrived as well. I suffered (and still do) from depression—yay, genetics!—as well as anxiety. I married an emotionally distant woman, and we had two daughters who I love deeply. When my first daughter was a few months old, I was diagnosed with testicular cancer, and the idea that I might die and leave my child without her father—and that I might miss her growing up—terrified me. Luckily, the cancer was caught in time, and I was fine. My marriage fell apart, and my wife and I divorced. I dated a series of women—some nice, some extremely strange-and I eventually fell in love with a wonderful woman who'd suffered a great deal of abuse in her past. From her, I learned what real trauma is and the kind of courage and strength it takes to survive and overcome it.
Horror movies, books, and comics gave me a love of horror tropes. My experience of the darker aspects of life—which we all must contend with to a greater or lesser degree—gave me an understanding of the dark emotional core necessary for producing truly effective horror fiction. I write horror because it stimulates my imagination like no other kind of fiction, and it speaks to the dark things inside me that I struggle to understand and come to terms with. I've taught composition and creative writing at the college level full time for the last twenty years. One year, my department chair and I attended a conference in Minneapolis. After a day wandering around the city sightseeing instead of going to conference sessions, my boss and I sat down in the hotel lobby. He was a literary guy, the kind of person who only believes a book is worthy if it gets a positive review in the New York Times. He asked me, with honest puzzlement in his voice, why I wrote horror. I thought for a moment before answering.
“Do you remember the banana we passed, the one that was lying on the sidewalk?"
He didn't.
“We passed it several times today. At first it was fine, but as the day went on, people stepped on it, and it got more and more squashed. I noticed it every time, and I can describe exactly what it looked like each time I saw it. That's the reason I write horror: I see the squashed bananas.”
My favorite answer to “Why I write horror?” is from Stephen King. When asked why he wrote about gruesome subjects, King once said, “What makes you assume that I have a choice?” In other words, I didn't choose the horror life; the horror life chose me. And I wouldn’t have it any other way.

PART TWO

Why Do I Want to Help You to Write Horror

I was probably nineteen, and I was sitting on the front porch of my parents’ house, looking at the field of corn across the road. We lived in the country, and back then, there were no houses on the other side of the road, just farmland. I don’t remember what I was doing or thinking. Probably not much of either. It was around 5:30 p.m., and I saw my dad's car coming down the road. I wasn't waiting for him specifically, but I was glad to see him. I watched as he pulled into our gravel driveway, drove up to the house—leaving clouds of white dust in his wake—and parked. When he came up the front walk, I saw that he was holding a thin paper sack in his hand with the word Wilkie's on it. Wilkie's was a bookstore in downtown Dayton, and Dad would stop there every now and again and buy a magazine for me, usually a copy of Famous Monsters. But today he brought me something different.
“I thought you might like this," he said as he handed me the bag.
I took it and pulled out a copy of a magazine called Writer's Digest. I had no idea magazines about writing existed, and I was thrilled. Dad knew I’d started writing, but he was a man of few words and hadn't really said much about it. The fact that he’d bought me this magazine was a huge sign of encouragement from him. He went inside, and I stayed on the porch and read that issue of Writer's Digest from cover to cover. I especially enjoyed Lawrence Block’s column on fiction writing, and after subscribing to the magazine, it was the first thing I read each month. Eventually, I sought out Block’s books on writing and devoured those, and I learned more from his writing about writing than from any teacher or class I ever had.
I was excited when J.N. Williamson's How to Write Tales of Fantasy, Horror, and Science Fiction was published, and then William F. Nolan‘s How to Write Horror Fiction. These weren't just how-to-write books—they were books about writing the kind of fiction I loved to read! I devoured these books as well, and read them over and over, trying to learn as much as I possibly could from them.
After graduating with a master's degree in English, I began teaching college writing courses while I worked on my fiction. But early on, I began writing articles on writing, too. I published my first such article, “Using Rejection,” in the online magazine Word Museum in 1 99 7. I went on to publish articles in Scavengers Newsletter, Speculations, The SIWA Bulletin, Writers journal, Ohio Writer, and eventually Writer's Digest itself. I enjoyed writing these articles. Not only were they fun to write, they made me think more deeply about writing, and I learned a lot from doing them. In 201 1, I started a blog called Writing in the Dark—which, of course, is where the title of this book came from—and that's where I do most of my writing about writing these days. Sure, my blog is a means to promote my fiction, but that's of secondary interest to me. I like helping people. It's why I became a teacher and why I've remained a teacher all these years.
A while back, I was one of the authors published by Sowin Books. The publisher arranged for a number of us to attend the Horror Hound convention to help sell and sign books. I didn't want to bring simple swag for readers—stuff like bookmarks and promotional postcards that no one cares about. I wanted to give people something they might actually want. I decided to create a handout for people interested in writing horror, which I called “The Extremely Short Guide to Writing Horror." It was a flop. Only a couple people took copies (although my fellow authors did). But I'm a big believer in recycling information, so I used the handout as a post on my blog, and then later developed it into a PowerPoint presentation I used for writing workshops at cons. For years, I'd toyed with the idea of writing my own how-to book, but I never felt like I'd learned enough about writing to give me the authority to do so. As the years passed, I wrote more articles and gave more presentations about writing horror, and somewhere along the way I guess I decided I was ready. You're holding the result in your hands. 
My hope is that this book will provide new horror writers with the tools needed to produce original stories that are frightening, entertaining, and well-written. But I also hope seasoned pros will find something useful here as well—information and ideas that might get them thinking about horror in a new way, or maybe just infuse them with fresh energy and enthusiasm for the genre we all love.
At the end of each chapter you'll find exercises and writing prompts to help you sharpen your craft and hopefully inspire you. If you teach or conduct workshops yourself, feel free to use this material—or any material in this book, for that matter—in your classes and sessions. After all, we have to make sure the darkness spreads and infects future generations, don't we?
One more thing . . .
As you make your way through this book, you'll notice I've used some examples—like the movie Jaws—more than once. Maybe it's because I have a limited imagination. Or I'm lazy. Or maybe I think it's useful to see the same examples presented in different contexts.
Yeah, you're right. I’m probably just lazy.

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

As a creative writing teacher, I appreciate it when students want to take more classes from me, but I always urge them to take classes from other writers as well. There's more than one way to skin Poe's black cat, and the more perspectives you can get on writing, the better. Even if they sometimes contradict each other. Especially then. I consider teaching to be like setting out a buffet. It's my job to put as many tasty dishes out as I can for you to choose from. But I'm far from the only cook in the kitchen, nor am I the most accomplished. So for this book, I wanted to bring in some more cooks to help me out. But who to ask and what to ask them? If I were a beginning horror writer, what would I want to know? The answer to this last question was easy. I'd want to know everything. But I'm not a beginner. I'm a busy pro, and I know what it's like to be sent an interview with twenty questions, all of which require detailed, thoughtful answers. It's work, and even if I want to answer them, I've got so much work of my own to do that it’s hard to find the time. So I decided to create two simple questions for my interviews. What do you think makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense, and what's the best advice you could give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense? And to make it even easier for people to respond, I'd tell them that I was only looking for short answers, just a couple sentences apiece (although they could write longer responses if they wished). And when I made that decision, I realized I could include more interviews in the book than I'd previously anticipated. A lot more. 
I asked as many people as I could think of to answer my questions, and while some regretted they were too busy to participate, most were kind enough to answer. I purposefully selected authors of many different types of horror—literary, extreme, supernatural, realistic, dark fantasy, pulp adventure . . . I wanted to make sure that the genre was represented in all its dark and glorious diversity. Brian Hodge called the bits of wisdom I gathered “flash interviews,” which I think is a cool term. I originally thought about putting the interviews in their own chapter at the end of the book, but imagining myself as reading the book, I thought it would be more effective to have the interviews spread throughout the text. So I've included a few at the end of each chapter. They’re in no particular order, and I didn't select them to match whatever a particular chapter's topic was. In a way, they're a parallel mini-book of their own, a collection of some of horror’s best—seasoned veterans, newcomers on the rise, and those in between. Sometimes they reinforce each other‘s advice—such as Read a lot—but I think that just shows you how important these writers think a specific aspect of craft is. Sometimes their views contradict each other, and that’s great. The more viewpoints about horror that you’re exposed to, the more it clarifies your own ideas and values on writing the stuff. I hope you find these snatches of advice interesting and useful—I know I did.
So as you make your way through this book, listen to these Voices from the Shadows. They've got a lot of dark and sinister wisdom to share.

CHAPTER ONE

WHY HORROR MATTERS

Years ago, a student asked me why I write horror. “You seem like such a pleasant person," she said. 
I looked into her eyes and smiled a slightly wicked smile. 
“Writing horror is what keeps me pleasant.”
We all have a dark side that whispers to us, a side that we struggle against and ultimately need to make peace with if we don't want it to destroy us. In many ways, that's probably the most primal story of humanity. Horror fiction gives us a safe way to explore and—hopefully—come to terms with our dark side. Horror stories allow us to confront our deepest fears through the buffer of fiction. Wrestling with the darkest questions of human existence—why is there violence, pain, cruelty, and death?—can be emotionally overwhelming. These questions can be too intense to deal with directly. Like an eclipse, the only way to safely view these aspects of life is indirectly. Horror allows us to do this. Horror can serve as a buffer in another way. It can distract us from the horrors of the real world, all of which are far more terrifying than any story about a ghost or vampire. Horror writers are like dark clowns that caper in front of our readers, making grotesque faces in the hope that the audience won't look over our shoulder and see the true darkness of existence behind us.
Not that most readers think that deeply when they pick up (or download) a horror book. They're looking to be entertained, and probably even more so with film and television horror. They want to enter a dark dream and experience the delightful frisson that comes from feeling they're in mortal danger, when in reality they're perfectly safe. It's the same for people who enjoy a trip through a carnival spookhouse. It's a fun experience that gets the blood pumping, that jolts people out of their everyday existence and—if only for a short time—makes them feel alive. And if this was all horror did, it would still be important. Who doesn't want to feel really alive? But even when it entertains, horror can do so much more, be so much more.
Horror is as much, if not more so, about individual characters’ experience than it's about whatever dark force confronts them. There's an old saying that an adventure is someone else having a hell of a tough time a thousand miles away. Any type of fiction can teach us more about ourselves and our fellow humans by showing us how particular characters deal with conflict—both external and internal. But horror turns up the conflict all the way to eleven. How do characters deal with the unknown, the impossible, the nightmarish? How do they deal with being exposed to—or tempted by—evil, whether demonic, mundane, or symbolic? What would we do in those situations? Would we be smarter, braver, more resistant to corruption? Would we be smart enough not to go into the dark basement, to resist opening the Necronomicon, to not invite the vampire into our house? Could we hold onto our sanity in the face of the awful things we encounter—or became? Psychologists suggest that reading and watching horror allow people to develop stronger survival skills. We engage in fictional scenarios to explore what we would do in dangerous situations.
How many of you have spent time arguing with friends about the best way to survive a zombie apocalypse or how you'd react during a home invasion by a Michael Meyers-like serial killer? All fiction can make people more empathetic by simply dropping us into a character's life and allowing us to experience how he or she tries to deal with problems. But horror fiction allows us to follow characters pushed to the absolute limits of human experience and beyond. The more pain—of all sorts—a character experiences in a story, the greater our empathy for that character. Horror also allows for deep catharsis. The ending of the movie jaws is a perfect example. After an entire film dealing with an implacable inhuman force, Sheriff Brody—clinging to the mast of the sinking Orca and literally in the shark's environment—manages to kill the beast at the last moment. And the resultant explosion is a huge catharsis. When characters not only survive but triumph against dark forces, we feel relief. We also feel that if characters in a story can do it, maybe we can too in real life. But good horror isn't predictable, isn't safe. Maybe the heroes succeed in banishing the evil, maybe they don't. Maybe they're defeated by it, changed by it, become part of it. Or maybe they only believe they've won, but it's a temporary victory at best because the evil returns in the sequel. (I contend that this, aside from being a marketing tactic, reflects how we deal with darkness in our own lives.
We can never banish it entirely. The best we can manage is a holding action or temporary respite until it returns, and it will keep returning until it finally claims us. How's that for a cheery thought?) Uncertain outcomes like these keep readers and viewers on their toes mentally and force them to deal with the more complex and mixed emotions uncertain endings bring.
Horror also offers another kind of catharsis. We get the chance to experience what it’s like to be the monster, to not be constrained by morality or even our humanity. We can stalk, torture, maim, kill, despoil souls, destroy worlds, all without ever committing an actual act of violence in the real world. We can get in touch with our dark side, explore it, map it, acknowledge it . . . and once we do, it ceases to have power over us. Or at least, its power is lessened. We're no longer afraid of thinking “bad” thoughts or imagining “bad” things. It's like The Purge, only without all the blood, death, and screaming. Horror can be deeply existential, too. How can we mere mortals hope to defeat all the things that make up Darkness with a capital D: death, disease, violence, temptation, degradation, insanity? What does it mean to be human in a world where the dead can return to life and seek to drain your blood or devour your flesh? What does it mean when otherworldly forces—infinitely more powerful than we are—seek to destroy or dominate us? What does it mean to be human when the monster is inside us, growing stronger every moment? The vast majority of audience members don't think this consciously about the horror they consume as entertainment. But subconsciously? I believe they do engage with the existential questions horror raises on that level, just below the surface of everyday normal thought.
Horror can provide comfort for the weird ones among us. (And I count myself as a member of this tribe.) With horror's focus on monstrous distortion—on Otherness—those of us who for one reason or another don't fit into society’s paradigm of normal can find a place to belong. My wife once told me, “You talk about monsters as if they‘re your best friends." That's because in many ways they are. A lot of you reading this chapter might be thinking that literature of any sort has the potential to do all the things I've discussed so far—and you're right. This proves my ultimate point. Horror is literature, and it's just as important and vital as any other type for the health and growth of humans and their culture. This sounds cool and all, you might be thinking, but l like to read and write horror because it's fun. There's nothing wrong with fun. If we didn’t have fun from time to time, imagine how miserable our lives would be. But I believe even popular fiction meant primarily for entertainment can fulfill a higher purpose, too. We all know that entertainment can provide an escape from our everyday lives, but it wasn't until my senior year in high school that I truly understood what this meant.
There was a small bookstore in the town next to ours. (This was back in the pre-Amazon past, when such places still existed.) My dad and I were browsing the bookshelves, and I was happily surprised to see a new novel by Piers Anthony in his Xanth series called Centaur Aisle. I'd loved the first three books in the series and had no idea there was going to be a fourth. Dad and I went up to the register, and when he saw the book I was holding, he asked, “Do you mind if I read it first?" I was shocked. In my family, whoever bought a book was always the first one to read it. No exceptions. My mother—who suffered from a number of health problems—was scheduled for surgery the next day. The procedure wasn't a very serious one (or so my parents claimed), but I understood then that my father was worried, and he wanted something to distract him in the hospital during my mother's surgery and recovery. I said yes, of course. And I realized then that popular fiction of all kinds-fiction written to be fun—has a profound power. It can provide comfort to someone who's scared. It can take someone’s mind off their worries, help them get through some of the hardest times in their life. Before we move on to the next chapter, I want you to understand that not only do horror writers work in a genre with a long and rich history, the stories we create perform numerous important functions for people as individuals and for civilization as a whole. So if anyone ever asks you why you're wasting your time writing horror instead of “real” fiction, tell them, “Horror is as real as it gets, baby." For good measure, hiss and bare your fangs, then get back to work.

EXERCISES

1. 

Spend some time writing about why horror matters to you. What do you like/dislike about it? This will help clarify what you value most about horror, as well as identify themes and story structures you’d like to explore.

2. 

Imagine the ideal reader for your horror fiction. Describe this person in writing. What sort of responses do you want them to have to your fiction? What can you do in your stories to ensure your reader responds the way you want? Pick a story you've written previously and revise it to strengthen the response of your ideal reader.

VOICES FROM THE Shadows

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense? 

Ellen Datlow, award-winning editor of The Best Horror of the Year

1. 

First of all, the same elements that make any good fiction: a fresh way of looking at common tropes by putting your story into an unusual setting, with characters who are interesting, and a plotline that does something different. And of course, suspense and a sense of dread.

2. 

Read read read. Read horror, read in other genres, read some nonfiction. And try to discern what it is about the writers whose work you love that makes you want to read their work, and continue reading it.

Usman T. Malik, award-winning author of The Pauper Prince and the Eucalyptus jinn

1. 

The creation of good horror relies on honing a sense for the uncanny and the trapping of that feeling, like an elusive night bird, onto the page. Think of an arrow about to be loosened: there is the arrow (the story or the character); the paced, precise draw of the bowstring (atmospheric, calculated relevant action); the loosening (the reader or character's sudden realization that something is very wrong and inevitable); and the target (the denouement, arrival of the uncanny/horrible). Every archer has their own way of getting the job done; the best have both talent and practice on their side.

2. 

You do not necessarily need to focus on the horror. Instead focus on the characters and their setting. Pit them against themselves, against each other, and against the setting, then sit back and watch what happens. Also, read David G. Hartwell’s landmark anthology The Dark Descent cover to cover to get a sense of how broad, clever, and cognitive horror literature can be.

Craig DiLouie, author of One of Us

1. 

Good horror fiction is a story that successfully conveys feelings of fear, dread, or dismay, but what’s key is how we get there. Besides the basics of good storytelling, for me what stands out the most is character, the monster element, and truth. Character comes first because everything hinges on it. Some horror stories put the monster element out first, which can be titillating but not necessarily horrifying. By delivering likeable, relatable characters and a deep point of view, the reader will empathize with the hero, and thereby immerse in the story to experience it firsthand. The quality of the monster element and its contrast with its backdrop is also key to good horror. The problem with the genre is so many of its greatest monsters have become clichés, demanding a fresh take. Whatever monster is chosen, the author should make it their own, either by producing something new, innovating on the familiar, or dropping the familiar into a fresh environment. Then comes delivery—how will the monster manifest? Stephen King identified three types of terror: the gross-out (e.g., blood splatters from a hacking blade), the horror (e.g., a spider the size of a car), and the terror (e.g., a child's voice singing from inside a bricked-up wall), which obviously can be used singly or in combination in a good story. Put another way, how tangible or direct is the threat, and how much is left to the reader's imagination? The only right answer is the author making choices and staying true to them. Which brings up the last major element, which is truth. The author must decide whether their story is a horror story at its black heart, or another type of story with a horror element in it. The reader should find frightening what the characters find frightening. The setting should be realistic to aid willing suspension of disbelief for the monster element. And often, especially for "big horror," the story should tie into a theme that ideally will unsettle the reader by making them think about an uncomfortable aspect of the world, human nature, or even themselves.

2. 

Know the essence of the story you want to tell, put character and story first, render realism in both the setting and character reactions to events, make the monster element your own, and tell a story that is true to itself. Balance the scares with happier scenes and even humor to allow the reader to blow off steam and put them on a roller coaster. Make it fresh, make the reader feel, make the reader think. Write always, read everything. And most of all, have fun.

Matthew M. Bartlett, author of The Stay-Awake Men: Other Unstable Entities

1. 

What makes good horror? People may tell you that it's plot, pacing, and relatable, believable characters. While those aspects may be important to some stories, and some kinds of stories, in my view they are secondary (at best) to atmosphere, imagery, and the creation of dread through the skewing or outright removal of what is in consensus thought of as reality.

2. 

What's the best advice you can give someone on writing effective horror? Read the genre, but read outside the genre as well. Read nonfiction. Read poetry especially. Be greedy for words, for well-crafted sentences and passages. Go to a museum, or to the art section of any book store for inspiration. Write as often as you can, keeping notes on your phone or a real—life notepad. Go out among people and keep yourself open—in the present moment—to all you see and hear and smell. The world is your fodder.

Bryan Smith, author of Merciless

1. 

Good horror starts with characters that feel like real people. Fully-realized characters allow for an emotional connection that wouldn't otherwise be there. Gore and extreme content are perfectly viable ingredients for an effective horror story, but gore and extreme content by itself isn't enough. It needs that palpable human element to mean anything. Horror is an expansive genre. It can be wildly entertaining and dig deeper into the human condition at the same time. The best modern horror stories are, in my opinion, the ones that best manage this balancing act. Again, keep it real. You can write about bloody Satanic orgies, monster rampages, or what-have-you, but it works better if the author subtly grounds the gruesome events in recognizable reality. Small sensory details can make all the difference. The smell of cigarette smoke and bacon frying in a lonely roadside diner at 2 a.m. Drizzling cold rain raising goosebumps on the flesh of a stranded motorist as a stiffening breeze carries a faint scent of rotting flesh. Also important are everyday mundane details. Financial worries. Relationship difficulties. The various ordinary ways people can feel disappointed or let down by life. This doesn't mean your story has to descend into melodrama, but definitely include enough of this sort of thing to make your characters more three-dimensional. A little of it here and there can go a long way. Then when the time comes to start spraying the blood around, the carnage feels more like it means something. Also, don't get hung up on finding the exact right word to perfectly describe a thing in your first draft. Just write and get the story told. If you can do that, you'll have an easier time finding that perfect word in the revisions phase.

CHAPTER TWO

THINGS UNKNOWN

One summer, I was teaching at a writing workshop with the literary writer Clint McCowan. One day while we were eating lunch, Clint said, "You know, all fiction is mystery.” He wasn't referring to the genre, of course, but to the questions that lie at the heart of every good story. What's happening? Why is it happening? What's going to happen next? And—especially in horror—how much worse is it going to get? It’s the sense of the unknown, of readers discovering a story one bit of information at a time instead of simply being provided a dry summary of it, that makes all fiction compelling. Fear of the unknown is at the core of all good horror fiction. Horror allows us to exercise our imagination in ways other genres can't. The Dark is a vast blank canvas upon which our imaginations can paint. Anything could be lurking in the shadows . . . anything at all. This is why darkness—the night, shadows, a full eclipse-is such a prominent trope in horror. To humans, who rely on vision as our primary sense, not being able to see what might be in the dark—watching us, preparing to attack us—is unsettling if not downright terrifying. Alien beings who might primarily rely on other senses such as smell or hearing might find lack of scent or silence highly disturbing.
I don't really label my horror in any specific ways, although readers, editors, and reviewers have called it surreal horror, nightmare horror, weird horror, and dark fantasy. And several of my short stories have appeared in volumes of Year’s Best Hardcore Horror. Any of these labels is fine with me, but I just think of my fiction as being my horror, fiction where the psychological states of characters are mirrored in the outer world—sometimes figuratively, sometimes quite literally. When I write this kind of horror, I walk a fine line between explaining exactly what is happening and making it seem plausible and allowing the images and concepts to speak for themselves without much, if any explanation. Not every reader or editor likes my approach to horror, but it's worked pretty well for me over the last twenty-five years. But it first appeared in my work about thirty-three years ago, in a story that wasn’t horror at all.
I was an undergrad in college. We're talking mid-eighties here. I wrote a short story whose title escapes me now. I have a vague memory of calling it “The Clearwater Monster,” but it could just as easily have been titled something else. But I certainly remember the story’s plot. It concerned two young boys who live near Lake Clearwater. One of the boys has a fanciful imagination (I wonder where I got that idea) and he likes to make up stories about a monster living in the lake and pretend that there really is one. The imaginative boy drowns in the lake one day, and his friend grieves. Years later, the friend-now an adult—returns to Lake Clearwater for the first time since the imaginative boy died so many years ago. The friend looks out upon the lake and is amazed and delighted to see a monster, just like the one the imaginative boy described, swimming in the water. He believes the monster is a manifestation of the boy's spirit, who’s made his stories become reality and who's appeared to say a last farewell to his old friend. I showed this story to a guy I worked with at the university writing center. We'll call him Bill. Bill read the story and gave me two pieces of feedback. One was that I should specify where the lake was located. I hadn't done this because I wanted to create an almost fairy-tale sense that Clearwater could be any lake, anywhere. “But you have to say where the lake is,” Bill told me. “You’re an American writer and all American writers are regionalists." (And that, boys and girls, is why you shouldn't take Lit majors too seriously.) The second bit of feedback focused on the story's ending, where the grown-up friend sees the lake monster swimming by, as if purposefully putting on a show for him. “It doesn't make sense,” Bill said. I explained my concept to him and said that I didn't want to over-explain it in the story because I felt doing so would rob the final image—and the character's emotional reaction to it—of its impact. Bill insisted that the ending needed to be clearer, and since the story was an experiment for me, I figured I'd try to do what Bill suggested and see how it turned out. Giving Lake Clearwater a specific location was easy. I lived—and still live—in Southwestern Ohio, so that became my lake's home. But as far as explaining the ending, everything I tried only made the story worse. A lot worse. Instead of depicting a moment of magic in a person's life, a brief instant when he felt connected to his childhood friend once more, the ending became bogged down with authorial narration, and the more concrete reasons I provided for the lake monster’s manifestation, the less magical the image seemed. Eventually, I said to hell with it and gave up on the story entirely. My creative instincts told me that my original approach was the right one, but the rational part of my mind decided Bill was right, my instincts sucked, and I moved on to other stories. Bill’s feedback wasn't the only reason I abandoned the story. I’d read a ton of how-to-write books back then. (This was long before the current wave of self-publishing, when only professional authors wrote writing guides.) So many of the books and articles I'd read advised beginning writers to always be specific, never vague, and they advised writers to avoid such literary tricks as leaving a story ending up to the reader to decide. They also warned that purposefully making a story too abstract didn't make you brilliant. It meant you were an artistic poseur. But as I kept writing, my urge to write these kinds of abstract, imagistic stories grew, and from time to time, I'd give it another try. But when I did, I always made sure to offer at least some explanation/justification for the story’s central image. A couple of these stories sold to small-press magazines, back when the small press was really small, but most didn't sell at all. 
And then one day when I was twenty-nine, I decided to submit a story to a pro-level horror anthology called Young Blood. The concept behind the anthology was that all the stories in it had to have been written before the author's thirtieth birthday. I wrote a story about a monster tree called “Yggdrasil” that was quickly rejected. Then I wrote a story called “Mr. Punch." It was a total trust-my-instincts story, and when I received feedback from friends that the ending needed to be explained more clearly, I didn't listen. I submitted “Mr. Punch,” the editor bought it, and it became my first professional sale. Later, Ellen Datlow selected it as one of her honorary mentions in The Year's Best Fantasy and Horror. I continued writing and selling such stories, ones that—as a colleague at the college where I teach once told me—center on the “logic of the image.” Eventually, I tried to write this kind of story at novel length. The result was The Harmony Society, which was followed by my first Leisure Books release Like Death. Today, thirty-something years after writing about the Lake Clearwater Monster, this is the type of horror fiction I'm known for, stories that have garnered awards and appeared in various Year's Best anthologies. Even so, I still occasionally have editors ask me to explain my stories’ central concepts a bit more. Sometimes I make changes, sometimes I don't. It depends on whether I think a clearer explanation will make a story better.
I can write stories that are clear and easy to understand. I do it all the time when I write urban fantasy or tie-in novels. But there are very specific reasons why I think over-explaining can be death for a horror story. (See what I did there?) Let me tell you why. “The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown."—H.P. Lovecraft
If you're a horror writer, you've likely seen this quote a jillion times before. The word unknown is key here. Vampires ceased being scary as fictional characters long ago. They're too known. Not only do readers—especially rabid horror fans—know everything about basic vampire lore, they've been exposed to images of vampires in media since they were kids. When it comes to horror, over-explaining and over-familiarity have killed vampires (and werewolves and ghosts and . . .) with more finality than sunlight and wooden stakes ever could. This is why vampires relocated to urban fantasy and romance. Vampires are now primarily adventure and romance characters. They aren't Monsters with a capital M. By not over-explaining a supernatural entity in a story—perhaps not even naming it—you keep readers guessing, keep them uncertain, make them uncomfortable, make your story not safe . . . Do these things, and you're harnessing the power of the Unknown. I know this sounds counterintuitive, but hear me out. Imagine yourself as a character in a horror story. You're driving down a country road in the middle of the night, and you see a full moon in the sky. You find this strange because you could’ve sworn a full moon isn't due for a couple more weeks. You peer at this unexpected moon through your windshield, only to see its lid rise upward, revealing a single, horrible gigantic eye gazing down at you. Do you really think you'd ever be able to understand what was happening? That you could pull over to the side of the road, park, grab your phone and do a Google search for “humungous moon eye" and a web page would pop up telling you exactly what the monstrous eye is and precisely what to do to defeat it? Hell, no! In real life, weird stuff happens all the time, and we hardly ever know for certain why it happens the way it happens. We just try to deal with it the best we can. The movie Sinister is a great example of unnecessary and story-damaging over-explaining. The monstrous fiend in the film is called Mr. Boogie (as in Boogeyman, of course), and the events that he causes to happen are creepy as hell—until our hero consults a college professor who explains that Mr. Boogie is really an ancient god called Bagul who collected the souls of human children a thousand years ago.

Yawn.

Mr. Boogie was scary when he was a thing, a creature of unknown abilities and motivations, who might not have any motivation, at least none mere humans could ever understand. But Bagul? He’s just a fifth-rate god in some obscure mythology text. What could be more dull? over-explaining kills any sense of mystery in a story. There's mystery in the Xenomorph in Alien. Not so much in the sequel Aliens. In that movie, the Xenomorphs are more numerous, easier to kill (at least as individuals), and their capabilities and life cycle are much better understood by Ripley (though not completely). The Xenomorph in Alien is a monster. The Xenomorphs in Aliens and every other sequel are basically animals. You could replace them with a pack of hyper-aggressive wolves and get pretty much the same story. 

Alien: 

What is this thing? Where did it come from? What does it want? What can it do? How does it hunt? Reproduce? What can it do to me? How can I kill it? 

Aliens: 

“Look, Xenomorphs!” Colonial Marines fire a shitload of bullets at Xenos, tearing them to shreds. Now I love Aliens, and while I think of it as an action-adventure movie with monsters, I don't consider it horror. Horror-adjacent at best. Want an example of a fantastic horror story that is drenched in mystery and the unknown? Read Jack Ketchum’s "The Box.” You can also watch a great film adaptation of the story as one part of the anthology film XX. Sometimes readers (and viewers) don't respond well to stories that are only metaphor, so giving them some explanation can help. It's like Mary Poppins‘ spoonful of sugar—it helps the medicine go down. After l saw Darren Aronofsky’s Mother in the theater, I had to hit the restroom. The guy using the urinal next to me asked if I’d just seen the movie and if so, did I know what it was about? I told him what I thought, he told me his theory, and then when we finished and our hands were washed, he went into the hallway to look for other people who'd seen the movie to find out what they thought it meant. While it was weird to have a discussion with a stranger about a movie while we were both peeing, it was a good example of an audience member who was almost desperate for a little more guidance in how to view a story. So while I complained about the Bagul stuff in Sinister earlier, a line or two that at least hints at an explanation can go a long way to help audiences who need something to hang onto when reading (or watching) a weird story.
I like stories that stimulate my imagination. Explanations-especially unnecessarily detailed ones-—don't feed my imagination. On the contrary, they starve it. They keep me outside a story, when as an audience member, I want to be inside, interacting with it intellectually and emotionally. Remember our old friend Mr. Boogie? For most of Sinister, he was a mysterious, malign, inhuman presence, and this invited me to try to imagine what he might be, what he could do, and what he wanted. But when I was told that he was just another pagan god, there was nothing left for my imagination to work with. The script told me what the story was instead of allowing me to help make the story. People attempt to define the difference between simplistic fiction meant solely for mindless entertainment and stories that strive to achieve more artistic goals. I'd say that inviting the audience to collaborate in the creation of the story by allowing room for their imaginations to interact with the text (or film), instead of merely spoon feeding them everything, is a pretty damn good definition. You don't need to write stories with supernatural elements to use the power of the unknown in your fiction. In “The Tale-Tell Heart," Edgar Allan Poe doesn't explain the origin of his unnamed narrator's madness, how the narrator (who could be either male or female) came to live with the old man he or she killed. Poe doesn't explain who the narrator is telling the story to or why it's so important to the narrator that his or her audience believes he or she is sane. There's nothing supernatural in that story, but there's plenty that’s unknown. Same with Shirley Jackson's “The Lottery." We don't know how or why the lotteries started or how common they once were (although we're told some towns are giving them up). In Ambrose Bierce's “An Incident at Owl Creek Bridge,” there's no explanation for the main character's experience (although an explanation can be inferred by the reader). In John Carpenter's classic film Halloween, there's no reason for Michael Meyer's murderous rampage, and that’s where the movie's horror comes from. This flirts with the supernatural—especially the ending—but isn't explicitly supernatural. There's nothing wrong with stories that are designed primarily to be fun, though. I've written two creature-feature novels for Severed Press—The Teeth of the Sea and Blood Island—and I created them solely to be enjoyable pulp adventure-horror. There's no great mystery to them, no strange imagery or ideas dredged up from my subconscious, nothing but monsters chomping on people and people trying to escape being chomped. But these books are the kind of thing readers read once and then forget about. These stories don't have any impact on readers, don't make them think or feel, and—most importantly to me—they don't stimulate readers’ imaginations in any meaningful way. They’re the simplest kind of horror, Goosebumps for adults. They're fun, but that's all they are.
If you want to write more challenging horror stories—stories which I think get closer to the dark heart of what horror is instead of merely using horror tropes to create only simple entertainment—try playing around with how much, or how little, you explain the weirdness in your stories and see what happens. Who knows? You'll at least add to your toolbox of narrative techniques for writing horror, and you might just find a brand-new writer's voice for yourself as well.

EXERCISES

1. 

Come up with alternative symbols for the unknown instead of darkness or anything having to do with the absence of light. These symbols could be drawn from the world's mythologies—meaning you'll have to do a bit of research—or they could be very personal symbols that you associate with the unknown.

2. 

Choose three random items—for example, a stop sign, an unlit candle, a bit of graffiti spray-painted on an overpass—and make notes for how you might be able to use these items as symbols of the unknown in a story. Then write the story.

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Graham Masterton, award-winning author of Dead Men Whistling

1

Originality makes good horror. Forget about vampires and werewolves and zombies . . . the world's mythology is crowded with terrifying demons and ghosts and other scary manifestations. When I published The Manitou back in 1 975, there were no horror novels around about Native American demons, and it sold spectacularly well, apart from being picked up almost immediately for a movie with Tony Curtis in the lead role. Since The Manitou I have drawn on demons from Japan (Tengu), the Middle East (The Djinn and The Sleepless), Mexico (The Pariah), Bali (Death Mask), and Poland (Forest Ghost). The only time I have written about vampires was a novel about how the Germans used vampires in World War Two to hunt down Resistance movements . . . but the vampires in this novel (Descendant) were based entirely on the original Romanian strigoi and never swept around in long cloaks puncturing young women's necks with their incisors. Instead, they sliced them open and drank from their main arteries as if they were refreshing themselves at a drinking fountain. So . . . always come from left field, and startle your readers with something totally new.

2

I have written some novels which might be construed as fantasy . . . the Night Warriors series of four novels in which ordinary people are recruited to fight evil presences in other people's dreams. On the whole, though, I think that horror novels are much more frightening if the characters and the backgrounds are highly realistic and very believable. Very few of my characters are heroic. Harry Erskine, the hero of The Manitou was a fake fortune-teller who suddenly found himself confronted with a real supernatural threat. My newest horror novel Ghost Virus features two of the most ordinary police officers you could ever meet, in a dull suburban setting in South London. If the characters and the setting are believable, then the supernatural threat is all the more scary when it makes its appearance.

Nicole Cushing, award-winning author of A Sick Gray Laugh

1

Originality. Too many books tread on land that was already cleared decades earlier. The good ones might start out in such a base camp, but soon march forward into unexplored territory, machete in hand, to blaze a new trail. Here are the names of some of my favorite trailblazers, past and present, foreign and domestic: Leonid Andreyev, Octavia Butler, Brian Evenson, Sadegh Heclayat, Glen Hirshberg, Shirley Iackson, Caitlin R. Kiernan, Thomas Ligotti, and Hagiwara Sakutaro.

2. 

Syntax, grammar, vocabulary, etc. are your tools, so you should be as well-schooled in their use as an artist is with his paint and brushes or a filmmaker is with her camera and lighting. Allowing several typos to survive all the way through to the published edition of a book is like letting the boom microphone drift into multiple shots of a movie. The crispness of your prose, the believability of your characters and settings, the logic of your plot—these are all your production values. Master them and you might write the literary equivalent of The Birds. Fail to master them and you might write the literary equivalent of Birdemic.

Craig Spector, bestselling author of Turnaround

1. 

To me, good horror is something that gets under the skin of the characters: it has an intimacy, regardless of the scope and scale of the ghastly events. Good horror shocks and unsettles, and lingers long after. It can be “loud” or “quiet,” but it resonates either way. Good horror rocks.

2. 

Write from the inside out. Crawl inside your characters, make us care about them living, then we'll care about them dying. Very few people are villains in their own minds, even if they're villains on the page. Dare to walk that line. Scare yourself first. Be fearless in exploring your fear. Be ruthless in exploring dark truths. And have fun with it.

Gary McMahon, award-winning author of At Home in the Shadows

1. 

I'll keep my answers focused on horror, because that's primarily what I write. To me, the essence of good written horror is atmosphere. Horror doesn't work without it. Whether that means a sense of mounting dread, a slow accumulation of creeping terror, or simply a sense of “spookiness/' it all boils down to the same thing: creating and maintaining atmosphere. That takes great skill, so the writing needs to be well crafted and polished to make it work.

2. 

This might seem controversial, but the best advice I can give is learn to write. So much horror I've come across is badly written, puerile, poorly conceived and executed, and reads as if it was created in a hurry. Take your time. Learn the craft. Write always from a place of integrity. Good horror is as good as any literary fiction I've encountered; bad horror is the worst kind of writing I've ever seen. 

Norman Prentiss, editor of Cemetery Dance Publications, Electronic Books Division

I. 

For me, the best horror story is a seance. That is, instead of simply dropping a ghost into the story, the author performs the necessary ritual, in words, to summon the ghost: creating the proper tensions among characters, building atmosphere, establishing a world view that invites a supernatural presence. This strategy can be especially difficult within the economy of the short story form, but ultimately increases a reader's belief in whatever creatures appear in the story—and actually, where I refer to ghosts generally, it applies equally to any blend of supernatural or non-supernatural “human monster." I'm not much of a coffee drinker, but to try another analogy, it's the difference between instant coffee and fresh-brewed. The “instant monster" isn't nearly as tasty.

2. 

Take your time. Take your time within the story to create the proper environment for horror. But also take your time to get published. Don't submit stories to magazines/webzines until they're ready, because the worst thing that could happen would be for a below-average story to get published under your byline, to haunt you for the rest of your career. Don't self-publish unless your fiction is thoroughly polished. And don't worry if your print publisher doesn’t get things out quickly enough: that simply gives you more time to have a follow-up novel or collection ready to go!

CHAPTER THREE

EVERYTHING YOU KNOW IS WRONG

The title of this chapter encapsulates a fundamental truth of horror fiction: horror comes from a violation of what characters perceive to be reality. This is why crime stories—a.long with mysteries, thrillers, and to a certain degree suspense stories—aren’t horror. The things that happen in these stories are part of the real world. Organized crime figures, hit men, drug runners, bank robbers, murderers, terrorists, abusers, revenge-seekers . . . We may not have encountered any of these things ourselves (at least I hope none of you have!), but we're all familiar with them, have seen news reports about them. They’re known. And remember what I said about the known in the last chapter. We might be afraid of the known, but it's the unknown that inspires the deepest, strongest fear in us.
But this doesn't mean realistic horror, for lack of a better term, can't be effective. A story doesn't need supernatural entities to be horror-but it does need to violate reality in ways that aren't familiar to readers, ways that approach the unreal and which cause us to react in disbelief and ask ourselves, How could that possibly happen? Monsters don't have to be creatures. They’re the embodiment of distortion, of veering away from the normal. “Monsters” don't even have to be embodied in physical form. A situation can be monstrous all by itself. In Black Ketchum’s legendary novel The Girl Next Door, which is based on a true story, a young girl is held captive and tortured in a neighbor's basement. Many of the kids in the neighborhood know about this, even participate in the girl‘s torture, without ever telling their parents or trying to help her. The reality of suburban life is horribly distorted in this novel, to the point of being nightmarish. What we thought we knew about human nature—ours, our family members’, our neighbors’—turns Out to be wrong in all kinds of awful ways. A different kind of psychological distortion occurs in the movie Compliance, also based on a true story. A person claiming to be a cop calls a fast-food restaurant and tells the boss that one of her employees is guilty of theft. The cop tells the boss to take the employee into a back room, keep her there, and interrogate her for him until he can get there. The cop continues calling, making the boss increase the severity of the interrogation step by step. The situation becomes increasingly nightmarish as the movie goes on.
It's the distortion, the violation of what we think of as the rules of reality—of society, of nature, of humanity, of physics, of space and time—that engenders horror. And regardless of what type of horror story you're writing, it’s this violation that should lay at the core of your concept. How far an audience is willing to follow you depends on how elastic their imagination is—or how well you tell your story (but that's a topic for a later chapter). Once people believed that vampires, werewolves, ghosts, witches, and demons existed, that these dark forces could enter our world to prey on us. But after more than a century of these creatures being fodder for books, movies, cartoons, comics, toys, and Halloween decorations, they’re an everyday part of our reality. A safe, known part. The mere concept of such creatures is no longer a violation of reality. (I'll discuss ways of refurbishing old terrors like these in another chapter.) A lot of people can't bring themselves to accept the existence of something so patently ridiculous as a vampire. But a psychotic neighbor who kidnaps a kid for torture or a sick prank caller who manipulates people into committing horrific acts? They have no trouble believing in these things. Other audience members can suspend their disbelief much further and are only too happy to accept tales of unearthly beings and dark magic—as long as they're not too familiar, and if they avoid retreading the same well-worn ground. One type of violation isn’t better than another. So long as you hit that nightmarish sweet spot with your story, you’re good. Regardless of how realistic or unrealistic your horror is, the violation of reality sends the same message to the characters in your tales and the people who read or watch them, whether this message is overt or subtle: The Universe is not orderly and benign, and is in fact chaotic and malicious. This is the terrible revelation that lies at the core of all horror fiction, and it’s what differentiates it from other types. So what does this mean for you as a writer? It means you should seek ideas that embody this core “truth” in order to build your fiction, then look for and stress those elements of violation in the story, perhaps distorting them even further until they begin to take on a nightmarish aspect. An example from my own writing: Several years ago, after dropping off my youngest daughter at middle school, I was driving home when I passed a young girl walking on the sidewalk. She looked to be around the same age as my daughter, had the same color of hair, and was dressed similarly. I only saw the girl from the back, and when I drove past her, I tried to see her features in the rear view mirror, but they were too indistinct. I knew the girl wasn't my daughter. There was no possible way for her to have gotten from her school to the place where I saw the girl in the time it took me to drive there. But what if it was her? I asked myself. A seeming violation in reality and a momentary musing on it became a story called “For She Is Fearfully and Wonderfully Made.”
A couple words of advice on using violations of reality in fiction. In general, the more realistic-seeming the violation, the easier it will be for people to accept, and thus the greater your chance at reaching a wider audience. The more bizarre or outlandish the violation, the smaller your potential audience. As a rule of thumb, one main violation per story is enough. This goes for both short fiction and novels (and films, games, etc.). A violation is like the trunk of a tree from which branches grow and split off, but it's still one tree. The Overlook Hotel in Stephen King's The Shining is a battery that stores negative emotions. In Salem’s Lot, one vampire comes to town and causes an outbreak of the undead. One devil-like figure plagues Castle Rock in Needful Things. Even in a surreal work like John Carpenter's film In the Mouth of Madness, the breakdown in reality is caused by a single thing: allowing Lovecraftian gods to enter our dimension. As much as I loved Universal’s monster rally movies like House of Frankenstein and House of Dracula when I was a kid, putting Dracula, Frankenstein's monster, and the Wolf Man into the same films diluted the impact of each monster as an individual violation of reality. In many ways, these films—and ones like them—were the precursors to modern-day urban fantasy and paranormal romance. If you've read any of my horror novels, you know that a lot of weird stuff happens in them, but I always try to have a single violation of reality at the center of a story from which all the weirdness sprouts. Because of this, some people consider my work as much dark fantasy as horror, and I'm cool with this. Not sure whether your idea is best suited for a short story, novella, or novel? Just ask yourself how many branches the trunk of the idea can support. Hell, draw the tree and label the branches to give yourself a visual representation. If it's only one or two branches, then you’ve got a short story concept. If it's a half dozen, maybe it's a novella. If it's a dozen or more, you might have a novel idea on your hands.
No matter what kind of horror story you're writing—supernatural, weird, psychological, dark fantasy, or realistic—it all begins with a violation of reality. So get out there and start violating!
(Hmmm. Maybe I should rephrase that . . .)

EXERCISES

1. 

Many years ago, I read an interview with Stephen King in which he said he got his ideas by looking at something and telling himself: “Something is wrong with that." Make a list of people, places, things, and situations. These can be things important to you, things you can see in your immediate vicinity, or any random thing that pops into your mind. When you've got a decent-sized list, go through it and tell yourself that something is wrong with each item, come up with what that something is, and write it down. The Something Wrong can be as simple as "I think that coffee mug is listening to our conversation" or as complex as “The parking lot is filled with white cars. The drivers must belong to the same sinister organization." Select the best Something Wrongs from your list and use them as the basis for stories.

2. 

Spend an entire day telling yourself that something is wrong with everything you see, hear, taste, touch, and smell. Ask yourself what those Something Wrongs are and write them down on a notepad or in your phone. Train yourself to always be aware of the possibility that something is wrong in the world around you. (But only as an aid to storytelling. Don't make yourself crazy!)

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Lisa Morton, award-winning author of Calling the Spirits: A History of Seances

1. 

I'd start by defining what makes horror at all: horror is fiction in which the primary intent is to frighten or disturb the reader. Good horror, then, is fiction which uses all of the writer's tools—setting, character, plot, language—to invoke that emotional response.

2. 

My best tip on writing effective horror is to read widely in the genre. Know the history, the classics, the best of the modern era; that way you’ll know what works, and what to avoid because it's been done to death.

Gene O'Neill, author of Deathflash

1. 

A read is good across the board, genre or literature, and horror is no different. But an excellent piece, including horror, requires the writer to provide something additional in terms of craft. It's an experience, not just a read.

2. 

I think scary is best implied. The reader is a collaborator, letting his imagination do the work. Seldom graphic description by the writer. The Haunting of H ill House is a great example—only one scary, graphic thing described in the book—a bending door. 

David Wellington, author of The Last Astronaut

1. 

Horror is probably the most subjective of literary effects. What scares me might leave you only mildly perturbed, and vice versa. A good horror story will support a variety of different kinds of fear, from the immediate disgust of gore to the lingering dread of the big, existential cosmic revelation. I will say that in prose, the one thing that almost never works is the jump scare.

2.

If you want to write effective horror, look at what scares you. Write about that. But! Always keep in mind that the point of a horror story is catharsis. You need a monster you can defeat, or at least an encounter your protagonist can survive. Writing about climate change in horror is tricky, because it's hard to imagine a character meaningfully reversing an atmospheric trend. Much better to write a story about someone trapped in a flood, or a suburban soccer mom who has to provide food for her kids in a time of famine. Keep your monster simple, easily described, and ultimately beatable, and you'll have a much easier time tapping into the lived experience of fear.


Paula Guran, editor of The Year's Best Dark Fantasy and Horror

1. 

As far as writing, it takes the same skills that any good fiction takes. Beyond that, good dark fiction makes the reader feel a level of disquietude that can range from the uncomfortable to feeling one is losing control of reality. It must do more than merely shock or disgust.

2. 

Read widely outside of the genre and beyond fiction. Be original. Write. Write some more. 

Jason Sizemore, author and editor-in-chief of Apex Publications

1. 

There's a great moment in the classic cult SF/horror comedy The Rocky Horror Picture Show that I think defines an important element of good horror. Dr. Frank N’ Furter is about to unveil his creation (Rocky) to Brad and Janet. He stops singing and holds the audience in thrall with the line: "I see you shiver with antici . . . [three second pause] . . . pation. Most of the time in horror, the build-up is far more intense than the actual resolution. Just ask Brad and Janet! 

2.

I offer two pieces of wisdom that are applicable most of the time. First, keep your villain off screen for most of the novel. When I think of my favorite horror novels, many of them have memorable villains that loom over the story but make a minimal amount of appearances. Some examples include Silence of the Lambs by Thomas Harris (Hannibal Lecter), The Stand by Stephen King (Randall Flagg), and The Passage by Justin Cronin (Babcock). Second, use torture and gore sparingly, so that when you decide to place your characters in visceral pain, it will be memorable. King Maker: The Knights of Breton Court by Maurice Broaddus is a violent, dark urban fantasy dealing with drug kingpins, gangs, and other nastiness. Despite its rough material, it’s not a bloody book. But . . . there is one torture scene involving razor blades that still turns my stomach. The scene sticks out because it's horrific and the author has used extreme horror sparingly in the novel. Even blood becomes boring when there are gallons of it available! Naturally, there are plenty of exceptions to these suggestions. The Girl Next Door by Jack Ketchum comes to mind. Another is Little Heaven by Nick Cutter. Still, following my two suggestions should help in most situations.



CHAPTER FOUR

HELLO DARKNESS, MY OLD FRIEND

Publishing—big or small, traditional or indie—is first and foremost a creative enterprise. If publishers (or writers) were interested solely in making money, they'd have become doctors or lawyers. But in order to reach readers and continue to put out books, publishing needs to be treated as a business. And in order to sell something, you need to put a label on it. In the 1994 film Repo Man the products in a grocery store all bear generic labels printed in plain blue letters on a white background. Beer. Paper towels. Crispy flakes. Even labels as simple as these serve a purpose. Who would want to go into a grocery where all the food items were simply marked food? Sure, some people might enjoy being surprised by what's in the cans and packages when they get home and open them, but most of us wouldn't. This is why every book or film isn't simply labeled Good Book or Good Movie.
But it's not just readers (or viewers) who have this consumer mentality. Writers do, too, and it shapes what we write. We start out as readers and we're exposed to labels on books and magazines right from the start: the genres, the authors, the titles. They're all labels. And if over time we develop our aesthetic as readers—what sort of stories and narrative techniques we prefer—we create our own labels for fiction: Type of Story I Like and Type of Story I Don't Like. (By the way, never trust a reviewer or critic who confuses “Type of Story I Like” with, “This Is What Makes Good Literature for Everyone on the Entire Planet for All Time.”)
There are pluses and minuses to a label mentality for artists. On the plus side, it gives us a direction to set out in, a discipline to explore. Writing, painting, acting, singing, dancing. And if we dedicate ourselves to one discipline, we can keep working at it until we reach a professional level. And we can further specialize by selecting a specific pathway in an art. Comedy vs. drama, popular music vs. classical. And, of course, having a label helps in marketing yourself and your work. But a label mentality leads us to imitate others, at least at first, instead of developing our own voice from the get-go. We find models we like and do our best to create art that mimics theirs. Look at all the fantasy writers who've imitated Tolkien over the years, or the current crop of grimdark fantasy writers imitating George R.R. Martin, or all the mystery writers who tell stories of quirky genius detectives like Sherlock Holmes or amateur sleuths like Jane Marple. Some of these writers find great success writing variations on other people's work, putting their own unique spin on it and contributing to the genre they're working in. Others remain imitators, their work pale shadows of what's come before. This chapter’s focus is on different types of horror and the special concerns about writing them, as well as their strengths and drawbacks. But before we start talking about labels, I want you to be aware they're a double—edged sword. Actually, a multi-edged sword, if there is such a thing. Advantages and Disadvantages of Labels in Writing Horror. Above all, they give you a place to start. If you enjoy reading gothic horror, you're familiar with its tropes and narrative techniques. This gives you tools to work with, to practice and gain skill using. Here are some other important points about labels:

- They can also keep you from developing your own individual approach to horror—your own themes and narrative style. You're so busy learning to become a label that you never become yourself as an artist.

- Labels are extremely handy marketing tools. They allow you to present your work to agents, editors, and your audience in a way that lets them know what they're getting. This gives you a much greater chance of selling your work because you're treating it as a commodity.

- But by treating your work as a clearly defined product, you can end up producing basically the same type of story over and over, like an endless stream of widgets coming off an assembly line. Over time, this can become deadly dull for both you and your audience. Assuming your audience hasn't gotten bored with your fiction and moved on to read other writers. Remember what I said about the unknown in Chapter Two? When an author debuts, his or her work is unknown to readers. But after that, their work becomes known—especial1y if they continue producing the same type of story over and over—and the work can quickly lose any sense of innovation in subject matter and technique. So before we talk about the different flavors of horror, I want you to consider a few things:

- What are your goals as a writer? If you want to make a living solely from your writing, then you'll need to write work that's focused primarily on being entertaining and which is solidly placed within a particular genre. You still may want to explore different subgenres of horror to see what you like to write, what produces your best work, or what an audience responds most strongly to. Once you've found a niche that works for you, you need to keep working in it, perhaps for your entire career. You'll also need to write novels instead of short stories or novellas. It's difficult enough to make a living writing fiction, but it's virtually impossible to do so by writing shorter-form fiction. And as I said earlier, having a specific label attached to your work will allow you to more effectively brand yourself. (We'll talk more about marketing in a later chapter.)

- If your goals are primarily artistic, then you can say to hell with labels and write whatever you want. You might gravitate more toward one type of horror than the other, but you also might explore different types at different points in your career. If you go this route, make sure you have a day job to support yourself, though. I'm a full-time English professor, so I have the luxury of being able to write whatever I want whenever I want.

- The ultimate goal of an artist—whether you see yourself as a commercial writer, an art-for-art's-sake writer, or some combination of the two—is to become your own label. Stephen King. Anne Rice. Clive Barker. Shirley Jackson. Peter Straub. Caitlin R. Kiernan. Joe R. Lansdale. Neil Gaiman. These are all writers whose names are their labels. They are, in effect, their own genres, and they're the writers others strive to emulate. If you want to have a chance at joining their exalted ranks, you'll need to keep working to hone your individual subject matter and style without worrying about labels. It's an artistic approach, but one focused more on developing the ultimate expression of yourself as a writer as opposed to consciously trying to write a particular kind of horror. The drawback to this approach? Hardly anyone ever reaches the lofty ranks of the bestselling self-labeled writer. But if that's what you want to shoot for, don't let anyone stop you.

- If your goal is more about learning as much regarding the craft of horror writing as you can—if it's about the work and not so much about yourself—then I’d suggest consciously moving back and forth between subgenres during the course of your career, trying it all and learning as much as you can in the process.

- If your goal is just to write horror and you don‘t care what kind, start writing and worry about labeling your work when it comes time to market it.

- If your goal is to have fun then write whatever the hell kind of horror that brings you the most joy even if it isn't a particularly popular subgenre.

One last word of advice before we start cataloging and classifying. It's okay for your focus to shift throughout your career. You can start out writing the most extreme splattery horror fiction on the planet and after a while start writing subtle psychological horror. You can want to make a pile of money originally but then decide feeding your soul by producing artistic work is more important to you. Or you can begin as an artist and shift over to being a completely mercenary show-me-the-money writer. It's your career. You do you, whatever that is, whenever that is. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise. A word of caution. These days everything is about branding. New writers are inundated with messages telling them how vital is it that they brand themselves as soon as possible if they hope to have any chance of success. Take that advice with several tons of salt. I don't want you to think you need to select a type of horror from the following list and specialize in it for the rest of your life to the exclusion of any other type. A list like this is good to get a general feel for the different types of horror that are out there and maybe introduce yourself to some new types to explore. If nothing else, I hope the list gets you thinking about how rich and varied the field of horror is. 

Supernatural Horror. 

This is arguably the type that most people think of when they think of horror (unless they think of slasher films, that is). It has an element of dark magic to it, usually drawn from some aspect of folklore. As I said in Chapter Two, there’s usually only a single element of dark magic that intrudes upon our world, that violates what we believe to be reality. One ghost, one cursed object, one monster, etc. Sure, you can have a nest of vampires or a pack of werewolves plaguing a town, but it's still one type of supernatural infestation. The more types of supernatural entities you put in a story, the harder it is for readers/viewers to suspend their disbelief and the more the story edges toward fantasy. Something to be aware of when writing supernatural horror: if you use well-known tropes like ghosts and witches, you need to find a way to put an original spin on them. (We’ll discuss how to do this in Chapter Six.)

Psychological Horror. 

Psychological horror is when the monstrous distortion occurs in someone’s mental makeup. Probably the most well-known character in this genre is Norman Bates from Psycho. The narrator in Poe's “The Tell-Tale Heart” fits into this category as well. This subgenre can—and often does—overlap with the thriller genre but psychological horror focuses on a greater degree of distortion in a character's psyche, to the point where they become a monster in their thought processes and behavior. Writing psychological horror allows you to put surprising revelations and twists into your story because you can employ unreliable narrators or characters who can be erratic and unpredictable. Gillian Flynn’s Gone Girl is an excellent example of unreliable narrators in a story. If you're writing in this subgenre, be careful to avoid overused tropes such as the misogynist serial killer or the character who believes other people are demons who must be killed. Strive for originality. Keep in mind that in real life, the vast majority of people who suffer from mental illness are not dangerous to others, and you should avoid portraying mental illness in and of itself as always being a monstrous distortion in your fiction. Make it clear that your psychologically disturbed homicidal characters are the exception rather than the rule.

Realistic Horror. 

Realistic horror can overlap psychological horror, but there’s often less of an emphasis on characters’ mental states and more of an emphasis on the actions they perform. The characters may well be psychologically messed up, but their mental states aren’t explored in any depth. The antagonists are portrayed more as predators. They are what they are, and they do what they do. The reasons for their actions may be explained, but they aren’t the focus of the story. The monstrous distortion comes from the awful things they do to other characters and the impact those actions have on those characters. Jarnes Dickey’s novel Deliverance (and its film adaptation) is a good example of this. Jack Ketchum is an absolute master of this form and if you’re interested in writing realistic horror, you need to read and study his work. The greatest advantage of realistic horror is that the audience doesn't have to work too hard to suspend its disbelief, and since the events depicted could happen in real life, the audience can be more frightened because they know what happens in the story could conceivably happen to them. It's possible to reach a larger audience because of this. A drawback of realistic horror is that it is realistic. If an audience is looking to have their imaginations stimulated by unreal story elements, such as supernatural forces, they won't get it from this subgenre.

Quiet Horror. 

Using subtlety and suggestion instead of in-your-face scares, quiet horror is more about evoking chills and shudders than eliciting screams of terror or cries of disgust from readers. Classic ghost stories—like those written by M.R. James—fall into this subgenre. Charles L. Grant is a master of this subgenre of horror, and if you want to write quiet horror, his work is a must- read. The monstrous distortion is hinted at by eerie details: dry autumn leaves moving along a sidewalk, even though the night air is still; a persistent scratching at your bedroom window, but every time you look, nothing is there. This kind of horror relies on a slow accretion of detail which eventually takes its toll on the protagonists, first causing unease, then dread, then ultimately terror. There's a strong focus on the characters’ mental and emotional states in quiet horror, and it can overlap psychological horror in this area, although the sinister, unearthly forces at work might well turn out to be quite real. One of the strengths of quiet horror is that as the story builds tension for the protagonist one detail at a time, it can have the same effect on the audience. Another strength is that since quiet horror doesn’t rely on spilling gallons of blood or showing characters being eviscerated in nauseating detail, readers who dislike graphic elements in horror won't be turned away by your fiction. A drawback is that modern readers might not have the patience for this type of horror. They want stories that move at a faster pace and where the horror looms larger. They don't want to read about soft scratching at a window. They want something to break through the damn window, rush into the house, and attack the occupants. 

Extreme Horror. 

This type of horror gleefully spills blood and guts all over the page. It depicts twisted violence and deviant sex, savagery and cruelty, all of which adds up to extremely monstrous distortion. This kind of horror turns off a lot of readers (as I mentioned above), especially if the extreme content is the story’s sole focus, and because of this, it tends to have a smaller audience than more restrained types of horror. And if the extreme content isn't handled well, it can swiftly descend into unintentional parody. Many beginning writers are attracted to extreme horror because they think it’s transgressive and edgy and that they're real artists who aren't afraid of going to places in their work that more timid artists wouldn’t dare to explore. But if there’s no point to the carnage, no exploration of character, then extreme horror is like a movie that's nothing but special effects from start to finish without any story—ultimately empty and forgettable. Extreme horror is like any other subgenre, in that it can be done well or poorly, but because it's too easy to mistake "extreme" for artistic content in and of itself, writers can fail to develop other aspects of their story. At its absolute worst, extreme horror can become little more than pornography—simplistic, artless material created solely to feed its audience's basest hungers. But at its best, it can be as effective and artistic as any other kind of horror. J.F. Gonzalez’s novel Survivor is an excellent example of this form. Jack Ketchum’s The Girl Next Dour—which I've mentioned before —is perhaps the best example of extreme horror where violence and its effects on everyone—victims as well as perpetrators—are employed to comment on aspects of human nature we'd rather not acknowledge. In film, the original version of Martyrs might be the ultimate expression of artistic extreme horror.
Want to know if your extreme horror story has anything more to offer than graphic violence for its own sake? Imagine that none of the violence is depicted on the page, that each time your deranged killer swings a machete at a victim, the scene ends and the results are left up to the reader's imagination. If you still have a story that could stand on its own merits without detailed depictions of violence and gore, you’re fine. If you don't, it probably means you've written a series of violent scenes that are meaningless. Those of you who aren't into extreme horror or have never read or watched it might be wondering: Why portray violence, injury, and death in detail if a story can exist without it? One of the strengths of extreme horror—and its prime ethos—is that it's honest. If violence and its aftermath are shied away from, glossed over, and sanitized for an audience's comfort, that denies the reality of what violence is. It's like old black-and-white movies from the first half of the twentieth century, where a gangster or Wild West character would get shot or stabbed and immediately fall to the ground, dead, without experiencing any suffering or spilling a single drop of blood. If you’re going to write extreme horror, you need to remember that your characters are human, not simply unfeeling mannequins to be dismantled for fun. This dehumanizing factor—this emotional numbness that can affect both creator and audience—is extreme horror’s biggest potential pitfall.
A huge problem with extreme horror is that there's often a nasty streak of misogyny running through it, whether this is conscious on the part of creators or not. Some people might argue that since women are so often the targets of violence in the real world, that this reality should be reflected in horror fiction. Others might say that by constantly portraying women merely as meat to be sliced and diced in stories, extreme horror dehumanizes women and perpetuates the idea that they exist solely for the entertainment of men. Gratuitous rape scenes in extreme horror typify this misogyny. Some people believe that rape should never be portrayed in fiction. Others think that if you're going to include extreme content in fiction, any type of extreme content is fair game to use. We'll get into a deeper discussion on using violence in horror fiction in later chapters, but for now, I'll simply say that, if you do employ rape as a narrative device in your fiction, ask yourself why are you doing so and what response do you want your readers to have to those scenes? If you have no reason other than you think it's cool to show women being raped, that it’ll be a turn-on for your readers and show the innate superiority of men over women, then you should probably sit down and take a good hard look at yourself and how you view the relationship between genders. And seriously consider getting some therapy. All of this may sound as if I'm dissing extreme horror as a subgenre, but I’m not. Reviewers sometimes classify my horror fiction as extreme. But I am saying that it's too easy to fall into the trap of focusing on the extreme elements to exclusion of all else—prose, character, plot, etc.—and using extreme elements in fiction irresponsibly.

Literary Horror. 

Literary horror—or, as it’s referred to in film, art-house horror—attempts to do the same thing any literary fiction does. It strives to create a stronger, deeper artistic experience. Writers do this by focusing on language and character more than plot (since plot is an artificial and obvious shaping of events that doesn't occur in real life) and by exploring innovative narrative structures and techniques, as well as deeper themes. Peter Straub, Paul Tremblay, Elizabeth Hand, Victor Lavalle, Caitlin R. Kiernan, Brian Evenson, and Kaaron Warren are all wonderful writers of literary horror and well worth checking out. Readers seeking a fun, fast read or a movie where they can check their brains at the door and have fun tend not to go for this kind of horror. The audience can be small (as it is for most literary fiction), but this is the kind of horror that tends to garner critical acclaim and awards, and which stands a chance of breaking out of the horror genre and into that most rarefied of all genres: Literature with a capital L. I think this might be the hardest genre to consciously attempt if you don't already love to read literary fiction, whether it's horror or not. If you see yourself as an artist more than an entertainer, this genre could be right for you.

Cosmic Horror. 

Cosmic horror is sometimes called Lovecraftian horror because it follows—sometimes slavishly—in the footsteps of H.P. Lovecraft. The idea is that there are unimaginably powerful and malign alien entities that are as far beyond us as we are beyond one-celled organisms. These entities are the true rulers of the universe and they can reshape reality to suit their whims, and we are so far beneath their notice, we might as well not exist at all. The core concept—that we are at the mercy of vast forces that we can never hope to understand, let alone combat—is where the monstrous distortion comes from. Anyone can relate to this basic idea. We can't stop or reverse time and its effects, we can't halt the approach of death. And the more we learn about the universe we inhabit, the smaller we feel. Lovecraft is credited as the creator and ultimate exemplar of cosmic horror, but some examples of modern-day non-Lovecraftian cosmic horror are John Langan’s award-winning The Fisherman and Laird Barron's The Croning. The main problem with cosmic horror is when writers imitate Lovecraft poorly or imitate his work for their entire careers, never finding their own voice and subject matter. Ramsey Campbell, Robert Bloch, and Brian Lumley all started out following in Lovecraft’s footsteps before forging their own individual paths in the genre. It's easy to see why it‘s tempting to write Lovecraftian horror. There's a loose mythos of gods, alien races, and creatures to play with—established enough to give writers some structure but vague enough to allow them plenty of room to add their own contributions, And the term Lovecraftian can work well as a branding/marketing tool, And there have been a number of anthologies looking to bring a more modern perspective to Lovecraft’s mythos. She Walks in Shadow presents Lovecraftian stories written by women, and Heroes of Red Hank (in which I have a story) features tales of people who Lovecraft marginalized—or even demonized—during his time. Lovecraft’s racism and misogyny are well-documented, and that's made him a problematic figure in the field for many readers, writers, and publishers. Many of us—myself included—feel it's a mistake to venerate Lovecraft as some sacred high priest of cosmic art. So if you want to work in the genre of cosmic horror, especially if you want to use specific concepts and settings from Lovecraft’s fiction, you’ll need to decide for yourself how to deal with his legacy—both the good parts and bad.
Another drawback to writing Lovecraftian fiction is that Lovecraft‘s creations—Cthulhu, Innsmouth, Miskatonic University, the Necronomicon—are so well known to readers that they've lost any real impact, almost to the point where they've become parody in and of themselves. If you want to write cosmic horror, I advise you to steer clear of overt Lovecraftian elements and trappings, if for no other reason than because, as I've said before, you shouldn't remain an imitator for your entire career. We already have Lovecraft and his fiction. What we don't have is your fiction and the stories only you can tell.

Erotic Horror. 

The name of this subgenre says it all. It's all about horror mixed with sex. But erotic horror is more than simply inserting sex scenes into a horror novel. The sexual elements are intertwined with the horror elements, and the monstrous distortion in this subgenre often comes from the erotic aspects of the story. One of the features of the subgenre is that the sexual elements can be both attractive and repulsive at the same time, and this dichotomy can be disturbing for readers—which makes it perfect for horror. This subgenre can and often does overlap with extreme horror. Sex works well as a story element in horror. Sex is intimate, on both physical and emotional levels. We're vulnerable in a way we aren't in any other aspect of our lives. There’s apprehension, fear of rejection and failure, and there are elements of dominance and submission that come into play. All of these elements are perfect fodder for horror. Some excellent practitioners of this form are Lucy Taylor, John Everson, Charlee Jacob, and Wrath James White. The Hot Blood series of anthologies are also great resources for exploring erotic horror. The plus side of writing erotic horror is easy to see. It's about sex, and sex and sexual identity is an integral part of what it means to be human. And to be purely mercenary about it, sex sells. On the negative side, it can be difficult to write sex scenes well and you might get bored writing them over and over. Erotic and extreme horror can blend well, but erotic horror can have the same drawbacks as extreme: scenes that don’t serve the story and scenes that can descend into misogyny. You also need to be careful not to engage in slut-shaming, homophobia, transphobia, etc. And it can become ridiculous if your characters pause to have sex at inappropriate times in a story. There's a monster chasing us through these woods? Let’: stop in this clearing for o quickie before we resume running for our lives. Another puzzling—at least to me—drawback to erotic horror is that some readers are uncomfortable with sexual content. Like, really uncomfortable. They can read about mutilation and murder without batting an eye, but the moment a character's genitals come into play, they freak out. I'm not sure why this happens. Mixed feelings about sex in general on the part of some readers? Whatever the reason, sexual elements can drive away some readers from your work. But on the plus side, if you want to make readers uncomfortable, want to make them squirm, then erotic horror can be an effective tool.

Body Horror. 

This type of horror can—and often does—overlap other types, especially extreme horror and erotic horror. David Cronenberg‘s films are well known for exploring this type of horror, and The Human Centipede trilogy might be the ultimate expression of body horror in movies. J.G. Bal.lard’s Crash fuses erotic and body horror, and Stephen King's story “Survivor Type" is a great example. Injury, illness, deformity, mutilation, transformation—whether mystical or surgical, chosen or forced—and parasitism are where the monstrous distortion in body horror comes from. Monsters themselves are incarnations of body horror with their unnatural, grotesque appearances, especially if they’re humanoid in any way. Like extreme and erotic horror, body horror elements need to serve a story. It's not enough to simply describe some bizarre mutation of the human form. And you need to be careful not to portray disability in and of itself as a sign of evil. Body horror plugs into some of our most primitive instincts—the fear that bodily distortion could be the result of some threat that might affect us, such as disease or poison. We naturally shun deformities for this reason; it's the animal part of us trying to protect ourselves. Plus, if readers or viewers imagine having the same bodily condition as a character in your story, they can experience a strong visceral reaction. Some readers or viewers are turned off by the gross-out factor in body horror, but others love it. In many ways, I think body horror works best blended with other types, especially if you’re writing a novel.

Surreal Horror. 

Surreal horror is a nightmare made real, where cause and effect aren't clear—or doesn’t exist—and perception of reality, and reality itself, are malleable, uncertain, and untrustworthy. Some excellent examples of surreal horror are the films of David Lynch, the novels of David Wong, and the manga of Junji Ito. Surreal horror has a lot of strengths. Because it's like a nightmare, anyone can relate to it. It conjures the unknown because the symbols used to denote and evoke horror can be very different from traditional ones, such as Frank the Rabbit in Donnie Darko. Because nothing about surreal horror can be easily predicted, the audience can't anticipate what will happen next, increasing their tension because these narratives aren't safe. Anything could potentially happen.
The drawbacks of surreal horror are basically the flip sides of its strengths. If events are too surreal, the audience can't suspend its disbelief. And if too many weird things happen, the audience can't relate to what the characters are experiencing and have trouble identifying with them—especially if the character's perceptions, actions, and reactions are also surreal. My brother isn’t a fan of surreal fiction. As far as he's concerned, if anything can happen, then there aren't any real stakes in a story—especially if events have no lasting reality or impact or can be undone. What the characters experience isn't meaningful for him if by definition it's not real in the world of the story, and in that case, many people can't even pretend the story is real for the duration of a book or film. To deal with these drawbacks, I suggest limiting the number and occurrence of surreal events in your story, spacing them out, and focusing strongly on your characters’ experiences. Making sure the story has a strong emotional core that will impact characters, regardless of how much weirdness they experience, is also important. 

Not the End of the Chapter. 

As far as I'm concerned, the forgoing are the major subgenres of horror. But there are other varieties that might be considered more niche subgenres, or genres that aren’t exactly horror but are horror-adjacent. Here (and in no particular order) is a brief overview of them.

Young Adult Horror. 

I don't necessarily consider this a niche subgenre. Any or all of the previously discussed subgenres of horror can appear in stories written for young adults. The main difference is that the protagonists will be young adults, and the themes and situations of the stories will mirror the concerns and anxieties of this age group. Extreme and erotic content most likely will be toned down to some degree—maybe to a great degree—depending on publishers’ guidelines.

Dark Fantasy. 

Dark fantasy is a fusion of horror and fantasy. The fantasy elements aren't those of traditional medieval fantasy with wizards and warriors, although some people put grimdark fantasy in this category. I think that's more fantasy than horror, though. Dark fantasy is when supernatural, fantastical elements suffuse the story. Neil Gaiman’s work fits into this category, as does Stephen King's Dark Tower series, as well as much of Clive Barker's work.

The Weird. 

I've placed the Weird here instead of listing it as a main horror subgenre because it's a mix of horror, fantasy, science fiction, and just about anything else you want to put into it. It tends to have a literary focus, but it’s increased in popularity in recent years. Read Ann and Jeff Vandermeer’s anthology The Weird to get a good background on this genre. 

Bizarre. 

Bizarro bills itself as the literary equivalent of cult movies. There's a strong overlap with horror, but Bizarro can be humorous and absurd, gross and disgusting, laugh-out-loud funny and deeply disturbing, sometimes all within the space of a few sentences. The best way to get a feel for this genre is to visit Eraserhead Press—which specializes in Bizarro fiction—online and check out their books.

Pulp Horror. 

Pulp horror is adventure and action—oriented horror fiction. I was on a panel once with Brian Keene when he classified his stories as pulp horror. I think Brian's work transcends the label because of the well-developed characters in his stories, but I won't argue with him. Check out his stuff for some great examples of this kind of horror. 

Creature-Feature Horror. 

This is a subset of pulp horror which I sometimes refer to as monsters-chomping-people stories. It can of course be well written and present well-developed characters, but its focus is primarily on giving people a fun read. Severed Press specializes in this kind of fiction.

Transgressive Horror. 

This subgenre is all about breaking taboos. It can—and usually does—overlap with extreme and erotic horror, but its goal is to get readers to question what they consider to be taboo and to shake them up mentally and emotionally, to jolt them out of their mundane patterns of thought and behavior.

Gothic Horror. 

This is a throwback to horror fiction of the nineteenth century, sometimes in terms of the type of story being told—for example, a subtle ghost story—or in terms of setting, such as Susan Hill’s The Woman in Black. Some gothic horror writers seek to emulate the style of nineteenth century writers as well.

Humorous Horror. 

Both humor and horror use the unexpected to elicit a response from their audiences, and because of this, they go beautifully together. A lot of Jeff Strands work falls into the category of humorous horror, and if you want to write humorous horror, he’s the man to check out.

Apocalyptic Horror. 

Stephen Kings The Stand is probably the best-known example of this kind of story. Richard Matheson's classic I Am Legend is another great example. And of course, zombie apocalypse fiction ala Night of the Living Dead and The Walking Dead fits in here. The world has ended, everything‘s gone to hell, and the survivors must deal with dark forces on top of the end of civilization.

Survival Horror. 

This can overlap with apocalyptic horror, but it doesn't have to. Movies like The Grey and the previously mentioned Deliverance are prime examples of this subgenre. What makes survival horror different from a survival story is that there's something about the situation people find themselves in that is dark and nightmarish, and that's where the monstrous distortion comes from.

Folk Horror. 

The Wicker Man, Harvest Home, Midsommar, Children of the Corn, and “The Lottery" are all examples of folk horror. People living in small, isolated settings adhere to the old ways of their ancestors—which usually means sacrificing outsiders to pagan gods that are real or imagined. This subgenre feeds off the uneasiness people living in the modern world have with nature and their disconnection from it.

Science Fiction Horror. 

Black Mirror is an excellent example of this, as are many of Michael Crichton’s novels, So are The Fly, Alien, and of course the one that started it all, Mary Shelly’s Frankenstein. Science creates the monstrous distortion at the heart of these kind of stories.

Country Horror, Small-Town Horror, Urban Horror. 

These are all variations on a theme. The settings are places where the characters are out of their element. They fear the residents view them as outsiders that must be dealt with—permanently. The Wrong Turn series of movies are good examples of country horror, as again is Deliverance and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre. Much of Stephen King's work uses small towns for its horror: Salem's Lot, Derry, Castle Rock . . . And Stranger Things is set in a small Indiana town. The Warriors has a nightmarish element to it that could arguably classify it as an urban horror film, and The Purge: Anarchy is another great example of urban horror.

Social Horror. 

This is horror where the monstrous distortion arises from a dark take on a societal issue and makes a statement about society. Examples: The Stepford Wives, Get Out, Us, Stephen Graham Jones’ excellent novel Mongrels, and many, many episodes of The Twilight Zone in its various incarnations. 

Religious/Satanic Horror. 

Books like Rosemary's Baby and The Exorcist, and movies like The Prophecy (not the one about the mutated bear but the one with Christopher Walken) and The Rite (with Anthony Hopkins), fall into the category of religious/ satanic horror. The monstrous distortion comes from religious concepts (usually Christian and often Catholic) depicting unearthly beings such as angels and demons as threats to us mere mortals. Some people find the concept of satanic evil to be terrifying. These are among my least favorite type of horror stories, though. If Satan exists, so does God, and since God always beats Satan, there's no tension in these stories for me. Their adherence to religious rules makes them too known for my taste. But they’re popular stories with a ready-made mythos for writers to draw on.

Supernatural Thriller. 

This is primarily a thriller which has a supernatural element to it. The movie The Gift is a good example. This is also a label writers and publishers use when they're afraid calling a work horror will limit its audience. 

Dark Crime, Dark Suspense, Dark Mystery. 

These categories are similar in that they may be dark enough to be considered horror, but writers and publishers prefer not to label them as such. If you weren't aware of it before, you are now: horror is an exceptionally rich genre. And it's made even richer by the fact that horror can be woven into any type of fiction. Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, Cormac McCarthy's Blood Meridian, Katherine Dunn's Geek Love . . . Douglas Winter famously said, “Horror isn't a genre. It's an emotion." He was wrong on the first count, of course. Horror is a genre. But it's more than just a genre. It's a primal part of the human experience that can be used in any work of art. And that's as good a place as any to end our discussion of genre, don't you think?

EXERCISES

1. 

Choose one of the varieties of horror that you’re unfamiliar with. Find a novel or anthology that exemplifies that genre and read it. Afterward, try your hand at writing a story in that genre. You can repeat this process with other subgenres of horror.

2. 

Select a subgenre of horror that you dislike, perhaps even hate. List the reasons why you dislike it. Having powerful feelings about a type of story—whether those feelings are positive or negative—can create some of the strongest fiction. Make notes on how you'd approach this subgenre and then write a story in it.

3. 

Come up with a basic story idea, such as “a character sees faceless people everywhere he goes." Make notes on how you'd develop this basic idea into a story in each subgenre of horror. Select your favorite pairing of idea and subgenre and develop it into a story.

VOICES PROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Christine Morgan, author of Lakehouse Infernal

1. 

I think what makes good horror is all about mood and emotion, stirring peoples’ fears, making them feel for and therefore worry for the fates of characters. It can take a variety of forms, from gore and violence to psychological to paranormal to the whole cosmic beyond-comprehension; it can take place in any time and setting. because horror is about fear and feeling. That’s what makes the characters so important, too. There's got to be some sense of empathy and connection, good or bad, for it to really work.

2. 

Again, characters. They need to seem like real enough people for the reader to connect to. Relatable and believable, with realistic or at least plausible actions and reactions and behaviors. The reader needs to be able to CARE, to visualize themself in similar situations and confront the inner “what would I do?"

Ice R. Lansdale, award-winning author of the Hap and Leonard novels

1. 

Conviction.

2. 

Believable characters and sharp dialogue can take you farther than plot.

Del Howison, author, editor, and owner of Dark Delicacies bookstore

I. 

Real characters not cliches. A true sense of foreboding. I like my horror grounded in reality and not the supernatural; even though that can be a fun ride, I don't find it particularly scary. Example—Hellmiser (fun ride), jaws (scary as shit).

2. 

Create the story around the people not the plot. If I don’t believe the people, I don't believe the story nor do I care.

Gwendolyn Kiste, author of The Invention of Ghosts

1. 

Good horror is a story that stays with the reader or viewer long after its final moments. Those books and films that creep up on you, that keep lingering in your mind—that’s what really gets to me as a horror fan. It doesn't have to be “scary” in the conventional sense; after all, many traditional jump scares tend to fade from memory. Instead, I crave something that I can't stop thinking about, even if I want to. That's true horror to me.

2. 

Be honest and unvarnished. Don't be afraid to explore what truly terrifies you. That can be difficult to do, because so often, it can be painful to examine not only what your fears are, but also why they scare you in the first place. But if you can dig deep and get to that truth about what frightens you and then put all of that onto the page, you can craft a story that readers will understand on an emotional and visceral level as well as a story that will stick with them and haunt them for a very long time.

Thomas Tessier, award-winning author of The Nightwalker and World of Hurt: Selected Stories

1. 

Horror is a big house with many rooms. Whatever you see in life and the world that is disturbing, unsettling, unnerving, frightening, terrifying, horrifying—can make good horror literature. Life is full of moments of worry, fear and sometimes panic . . . or worse. Good horror writing opens those moments up.

2. 

Make your characters real—it’s essential if you want your reader to invest in them and engage in your story. Suspense—this means just keep advancing the story, so the reader wants to know what happens next. Even a scene in which nothing happens but two people sit talking in a bar or anywhere can heighten suspense and fear if written right. Dialogue—speak your dialogue out loud when you write it; if it feels odd, awkward, uncomfortable or otherwise not quite right to you, that's the way it will hit readers. In your everyday life, listen to what other people say and how they speak. Good dialogue can carry tons of freight  Attention to detail—sometimes the unexpected brush of a hand can be the most disturbing thing.

CHAPTER FIVE

STRANGE NOTIONS

Janet ran, stumbling through the night, heart pounding, lungs on fire. All she could hear was her own ragged breath and the rustle of leaf and snap of twig as she crashed through the underbrush. But she didn't have to hear pounding footfalls to know that HE was following close behind. If only she hadn't had sex with Billy, had listened to her mother and stayed a virgin. If only she had remained back at camp with the other counselors. If only she gave more to charity, was kinder to animals, read to shut-ins. . . A huge, shapeless silhouette reared up before her, sickly yellow moonlight glinting off ax metal. Janet started to scream, but all that came out was a hot, gurgling sound as the ax bit deep into her throat. Again and again and again. . . The previous scene is the sort of fiction produced by many beginning horror writers, those who haven't actually read much in the genre and instead base their stories on multiple viewings of Friday the 13”‘ and Nightmare on Elm Street flicks. And while such films can have a visceral (pun intended) impact, they don’t always make good inspirational fodder for fiction. 
Slasher films and their ilk rely primarily on shock. And shock is a Jaycee-sponsored Halloween Haunted House sort of thing. It relies on visual and auditory surprise—some guy in a rubber mask and fright wig jumping out from a darkened doorway hollering “Ooga-booga!" Such effects are nearly impossible to create on the page. They need to be experienced live and in person. Besides, even if you could create shock effectively in written stories, why would you want to? It's an extremely limited technique. The audience might gasp and jump the first time or two you spring your Jack-the-Ripper-in-a-box on them, but no matter how well-crafted your shock machine is, readers will soon become so desensitized to its tricks that they won't even be able to work up the energy to yawn.
Shock is a quick, easy scare. Empty, and to the audience, ultimately unsatisfying. Readers want horror that does more than go “Boo!” They want horror that disturbs them, shakes them up, that reaches into their guts with cold bony fingers and stirs their wet parts around. So how do you write stories that do this? By crafting stories drawn from personal horror. Remember Douglas Winter's statement about how horror isn’t a genre, but rather an emotion? In order to write effective—and original—horror, you need to dig into your own psyche and find out what scares you, what disturbs you, what hurts you. It's what jack Ketchum used to refer to as “writing from the wound.” Worried that no one will be frightened by the same things you are? Don't be. As Aristotle said, the only way to get to the universal is through the particular. By focusing on your own personal fears and giving them shivery life on the page, you'll be connecting to your audience—guaranteed. But you don‘t need to traumatize yourself in order to come up with ideas to write about. While it's true that the most difficult experiences we go through can make powerful inspiration for fiction, if there are memories that are too painful for you to recall, you don't have to relive them if you don't want to. It's a cliche that artists must suffer for their art, and some people might argue that the experiences we're most hesitant to mine for our fiction are exactly the ones we should explore. And of course, writing about them can be cathartic. But it's your choice where you go inside yourself to come up with material for your stories, no one else’s. That said, let's talk about how to use your personal experiences, fears, and obsessions to generate story ideas. What were you afraid of as a child? The dark? Thunder and lightning? The barking German shepherd next door? Mommy and Daddy yelling at each other? Make a list of your childhood boogeymen, and write at least a paragraph about each item. Don't think in terms of story, just write whatever comes to mind. Try to focus on your feelings and what sparked those feelings—remember, horror is an emotion.
Next—and this might be difficult—make a list of any disturbing events in your childhood. Encounters with schoolyard bullies, severe illnesses, deaths of friends and family members. Again, write at least a paragraph on each item. When I was around five or six, my mother was severely burned when taking a roast out of the oven. I remember her being in the hospital, the doctors taking skin from her legs and back to use for grafts. I remember the watery feeling in my guts when later, after she'd healed, she let me touch the brown patch of tight smooth skin on her palm. The edges were so distinct; it seemed as if I could pinch them between my thumb and forefinger and slowly peel away my mother’s borrowed flesh to reveal the moist secrets which lay within.
Childhood is a time when everything is new, wondrous and terrifying‘ A time when we feel emotions most deeply. And it's those sorts of intense emotions you want to summon and use to write your horror. But you don't have to confine your self-exploration to the past. Pay attention to the events in the news which upset and anger you. Collect newspaper and magazine articles and keep them in a folder. Don't merely collect every article on murder you find. Look for stories which arouse an emotional reaction in you, stories which fascinate you. One of the news stories I've collected over the years concerns an apartment house near Ohio State University which had an electric chair perched on the roof. According to the article, the building’s occupants had no idea who put the chair up there and why. It was there when they moved in. As they said, “It's always been there." Now there's a story waiting to happen!
Another area you can explore for ideas is the realm of dreams. Every morning, as soon as you get up, record your dreams in a journal. A friend of mine in college had been keeping dream journals for years. When he first started, he only remembered having two or three dreams a night. But after a couple years of faithfully writing in his journal, he routinely recalled fifteen or sixteen. And while many of them weren't more than snatches of everyday life replayed on the mind's dream-screen, he always had at least a couple that were quite surreal and disturbing. Added up over the course of a year, that's a lot of potential story ideas. In our dreams, our defenses and pretenses are swept aside, and we are most ourselves. Your dreams are unique; use them to write stories that are uniquely yours.
Do you remember me talking in an earlier chapter about an interview with Stephen King, how he got ideas by looking at something and telling himself that something is wrong with it? You can do this, too. Take a look around you and let your imagination run paranoid. Choose a minor aspect of your life or an ordinary event and tell yourself that something is wrong with it. Seriously wrong.
Ask yourself what's most important, most dear to you. What do you treasure? Who do you love? Now ask yourself what if these things were threatened, removed, altered, turned against me? How would you feel? And most importantly, what would you do about it? Your answers to these questions will provide some of your best and most personal story ideas. Sometimes I base a story on something weird I've seen out in the world. Other times I choose an experience from my past. Often, I combine the two. I keep a list of ideas on a notepad app file on my phone, and I read over it—and over and over and over it—hoping one of the ideas there might suddenly reveal itself as the most brilliant idea for a story ever conceived in the history of the human race. I get a lot of my ideas from interacting imaginatively with the world around me. I’ve always had a strong imagination, and I spend most of my time living in my head. So if I see something that strikes me as odd, it sparks ideas. For example, a couple years ago, I found a large wooden stake in my yard. I know the stake was left by people doing construction on the street, but my imagination immediately thought: This was left by a vampire hunter during the night. This is how I think all the time, so whatever I'm doing—taking a walk, reading a news article, watching a TV show—I’m constantly responding to whatever stimuli are around me. I also get ideas from misperceptions. A word I misheard, or something I saw out of the corner of my eye that I mistook for something else. Once when I was driving home, I saw a woman in her front lawn. As I passed, I caught a glimpse of her face, and it looked as if she had the skull of some prehistoric beast for a head, with long, curved upper and lower fangs. I write down these kinds of details because I experience so many of them throughout the day that I’ll forget them if I don't. Not all of them become inspiration for stories, but a lot do. When you walk in the world as an imaginative person, you notice all kinds of weird things, and you wonder at their origins and possible (hidden) meanings. For example, years ago, in the space of a week, I saw two different men walking backward at two different locations. I had no idea why these men would be walking backward. It was so strange! I wrote a note about it on my phone's notepad app, and some time later, when I was searching for a story idea to use for an anthology, I read over my list of ideas and found The Backward-Walking Men. I used that image as the basis for the story. I try to make my stories unique—both from each other and from what other people write—in several ways. One is by drawing inspiration from the world around me, as in the above example. I was likely the only person on Earth who saw those two men in that week and wrote it down in his phone. Then I combined it with another idea, one that at first might not seem to fit. The anthology I was writing the backward-walking men story for was Heroes of Red Hook. The book’s concept was Lovecraftian fiction featuring diverse heroes. I made the backward-walking men into one man, and I chose a young autistic man as my hero. His special perception of the world allowed him not only to see the Backward-Walking Man—who was walking backward as he unmade reality —but to defeat him. I also try to make sure each story has an emotional core. For “The Backward-Walking Man," the emotional core is that my hero has been treated all his life as if something's wrong with him, that he's lesser. But through the events of the story, he realizes the way he looks at life is special and valuable, and so is he.
So I guess my story formula would be Weird Observation + Seemingly Unrelated Idea + Emotional Core. If I can nail down those three things, I can usually come up with what I hope is a decent story. Horror, like all good literature, evolves with the times. And while predicting the future is a fool's game, I'm going to play it anyway. Following are some themes I think horror will tackle in the years to come. If you want your horror to be forward-thinking, you might consider exploring some of them to get ideas for your stories. The rise in authoritarianism in the world will continue to fuel horror fiction. The Purge movies are good examples of films that, while created primarily for entertainment, explore this concept. I think we'll see more stories that deal with the disparity between rich and poor, powerful and powerless. Climate change will cause a rise in environmental horror, and the #me too movement will inspire more stories about the changing power dynamics between men and women. As people around the world continue to debate the merits of socialism, themes of the individual versus the group will show up more often in stories. The changing racial and ethnic makeup of societies will continue to fuel fiction, as will the role of the individual in an increasingly technological world. The next chapter discusses how to avoid cliches in horror and write more original fiction, and Chapter Seven talks about how to build a better monster. Both of those chapters can also help you generate story ideas. Chapter Nine discusses the Horror Hero‘s Journey, and you might find inspiration for stories there as well. I’ve also included a list of story situations at the end of the book in Appendix A which you might find useful.
In the end, it's simple: If you want to write truly effective horror, don’t merely recycle the imaginings of others. Write the stories only you can tell. And in the process, scare the crap out of the rest of us.

EXERCISES

1. 

This chapter is already filled with exercises. Go do them.

2. 

Make a list of horror stories that you think have a great central idea. What made those ideas so effective for you? Go through the list and see if there are any common elements to the ideas you like. Getting a better feeling for the ideas that you respond to as a reader will help you identify ideas that will make for your strongest fiction.

3. 

Try using my formula I mentioned earlier: Weird Observation + Seemingly Unrelated Idea + Emotional Core. See if it helps generate some story ideas you'd like to explore.

VOICES PROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Jonathan Maberry, bestselling author of the Joe Ledger: Rogue Team International series

1. 

Horror is a very personal thing. What frightens you might not frighten me. What scares me might delight you. Horror fiction, therefore, is an exploration of those things that unnerve and disquiet us, written in a way that allows the reader to climb into our heads and nerve endings, and to drive around in our phobias for a while.

2. 

Writers should never try to write about someone else’s fears. Good horror begins with a personal journey through the nightmare landscape of our own fears. It is not true that good horror writers are fearless in what they do—no. They are, however, able and willing to stare their fears in the eye and, with trembling hands, put what they’re feeling down on paper. 

Michele Garza, co-author of Those Who Follow

1. 

Good horror leaves you feeling something once you’ve finished reading/viewing it. If it sticks in your mind and heart, then it has accomplished what it set out to do.

2. 

Though it can be fun to go into every gory detail, and we do quite often, letting your audience’s imagination fill in some blanks can be effective. Build up to those moments and let suspense twist their guts a little before dropping the hammer on them. It's not the maggot falling out of an undead attacker’s maw and into a squirming protagonist’s screaming mouth, it’s imagining watching it dangle from his dry lip and knowing where it’s going to end up that will leave someone thinking about your story for a long time.

Kevin Lucia, author of Things You Need

1. 

For me, the most effective and enjoyable horror is most often rooted in some element of the human experience. Emotions like fear, regret, sadness, guilt, longing, loneliness, bitterness . . . these are the engines which, I believe, propel powerful horror fiction, the kind which lingers for days after the final page is read. That's not to say that horror can’t be exciting, suspenseful, or simply a blast to read. However, when a horror story is both entertaining and insightful, it's something truly special to behold.

2. 

Your mileage may vary, but . . . I most enjoy stories which fully root themselves in a very real, tangible, practical world first, before the supernatural or horrific is introduced. Give characters time to grow. To become real people. Though reader empathy can be very subjective, depending on the reader, try and make your characters people who readers will care about . . . or at least feel something about. For “horror” to really feel horrific, readers need to buy into the belief that characters are people they'd hate to see hurt.

Izzy Lee, writer/director of Innsmouth, My Monster, Re-Home and Postpartum

I. 

Any good horror or dark tale builds dread, in my opinion. These are the stories that keep you up at night, the ones that keep you wondering what’s around that corner, in the dark, beneath the waves, or under the bed.

2. 

The best advice I can give to anyone writing horror or suspense is to think about what it is that disturbs you. What is it that makes you truly uncomfortable or afraid? Is it a place, a phobia, a situation, a person? Now explore that, as squirmy as it may make you, because the more personal and truthful you are in your fear, the more universal it's actually going to be.

CHAPTER SIX

DONE TO DEATH

One of the aspects of writing fiction—or practicing any art, really—that can drive people crazy is how do you learn the conventions of the genre you're working in while at the same time striving for originality? You're told your work needs to be marketable, that it should fit into a recognizable category, but you're also told that you need to make your work stand out from the crowd if you want to get noticed. Well, I’m here to tell you that it's possible to strike a balance between regurgitating the same old horror concepts readers have seen a million times and producing work so idiosyncratic that readers aren’t sure what the hell it is. You can fulfill readers’ genre expectations and create original fiction—by avoiding what’s been done to death. A genre is a type of literature employing shared characters, settings, themes, and story structures. Haunted houses, bloodthirsty undead, werewolves, psychotic killers, devil-worshippers, ancient graveyards . . . All of these (and many more) are concepts shared by horror writers, and taken as a whole, they're one of the most obvious ways to define the genre. A trope, according to Wikipedia, is a “familiar and repeated symbol, meme, theme, motif, style, character, or thing that permeates a certain type of literature." In other words, shared features and conventions. About.com defines a cliché as “a trite expression . . . whose effectiveness has been worn out through overuse and excessive familiarity.”
A trope becomes a cliché when it’s been used so many times that it ceases to be fresh and surprising. Artists can create their own personal clichés as well. M. Night Shyamalan‘s first film, The Sixth Sense, had a twist ending. Most of the films Shyamalan put out afterward had twist endings, too. But the movie-going audience quickly became accustomed to his films ending with a twist, so those twists weren't surprising. They became Shyamalan’s own cliche. Horror tropes like vampires, witches, ghosts, zombies and all the rest have been used so many times in literature and film that the very concepts have become cliché. Once a specific type of character, threat, or story structure becomes too familiar, it loses its power to engage and affect readers—especially in horror which, as I’ve said before in this book, depends on the unknown. If you've encountered a trope in books, magazines, or comics, seen it in movies, on TV, or in video-games, don't use it-not without reworking it. And that's what this chapter is about: giving you techniques for rehabbing tired, worn-out tropes and making them shiny and new—or at least seem to be shiny and new. Let me tell you a story.
I was nineteen years old, a freshman in college. I'd started out as an acting major, but by this time I’d switched to theatre education. I'd already decided that I was going to devote my life to writing, but I figured I needed a job while I was cranking out those first million practice words. I was interested in teaching, and my degree included a concentration in English, so I figured I’d teach high school while I wrote on the side, until I became rich and famous and could retire from teaching to write full-time. (However, when I finally did my student teaching my last quarter in college and saw what working in a high school was really like, I lost no time applying for graduate school so I could teach at the college level.) The best teacher I ever had was Dr. Jeffrey Huberman, the professor who taught my acting class. We all hated him at first because he was strict and demanding, and we were lazy middle-class kids used to vegging out in front of the TV in those pre-Internet, pre-Facebook, pre-video game days (unless you count Space Invaders and Asteroids). But most of all, we hated Dr. Huberman because he refused to accept anything less than great work from us. He repeatedly told us that we all were capable of greatness. We just needed to believe it, reach down deep inside ourselves, and never give anything less than our absolute best. But he didn't do this in a rah-rah cheerleader kind of way. No, his way was absolutely terrifying. He acted as if our potential was a simple fact, no more remarkable than 1+1 =2. Whenever we performed a scene in class, instead of saying, “Begin,” Dr. Huberman repeated the famous challenge Sergei Diaghilev gave to Jean Cocteau: “Astonish me.” At first we resisted trying to live up to what he believed we could do, but then—little by little—the scenes we performed in class became electric, alive with tension and passion. Drama in the truest, best sense of the word. At the time I'd already written a couple unpublishable novels, a dozen or more unpublishable stories, and a couple unpublishable plays. Like a lot of college kids in Dayton, Ohio, I hung out at the weekly midnight Saturday showings of The Rocky Horror Picture Show at the Little Art Theatre, and since I'd loved horror all my life, I figured I’d try my hand at crafting a horror musical. So I wrote the script and lyrics for songs. No music, though. I figured I'd need a collaborator for that. You know, someone with actual musical ability. And when I was finished writing, I took everything to Dr. Huberman and—nervously-asked him to read it and tell me what he thought. I honestly didn't expect him to do it, figured he was too busy, but he agreed, and a week later he told me to come to his office to talk about my play.
The first thing he did was point to a portion of a scenery description I'd written that said standard horror shit. It had only been a note to myself, and I was embarrassed that I'd forgotten to change it to more professional language. I started to explain that I wouldn’t use the word shit in the final product, but Dr. Huberman cut me off. It wasn't the expletive that bothered him. It was the word standard. He said that while there was some fun stuff in my play, most of it was nothing but a rehash of well-worn horror tropes. Why would I choose to write standard anything? After all, I was capable of so much more. He knew it. And, after having been in his acting class for a while at that point, so did I. So I trashed that version of the play—though I kept the awful title, Dementia Pruecox—and wrote a brand-new, much more original, and far better version. Which of course still wasn't good enough to be produced, but it was a hell of lot better. So how can you go about avoiding writing standard horror shit? Here are some tips. Read a hell of a lot. You'd think this would be a no-brainer, but far too many beginners want to write without having done much reading. (How and why this occurs is unfathomable to me, and to every other professional writer I've ever spoken to about it. My theory is these beginners would rather be making movies, but that's too much work, involves too many other people, and requires wads of cash, equipment, and technical training, so they settle for trying to write fiction.) The more you read, in and out of your chosen genre, the more you’ll come to realize that maybe the world doesn’t need any more stories like “The last man and woman to survive the nuclear holocaust are really Adam and Eve!" or “Oh my gosh! The narrator dies in the end and he's really a ghost telling the story of his own death!” Knowing what's come before will keep you from reinventing the wheel. Be careful of jumping on bandwagons. Like zombie stories? Want to write one because they're popular and you think you'll have a better chance of selling it? Maybe. But every other eager writer out there is thinking the same damned thing, and they're all writing the same zombie story you are. If you must write a zombie story, try to pursue an angle you haven't seen before. I once had a student write about a man whose dog had become a zombie, and how the man tried to deny what had happened and pretend the dog—his only friend in the zombie-decimated world—was still normal. Nothing standard about that. Don't go with your first idea. Or even your second. And be suspicious of your third one. No matter how hard we all try, the first ideas we come up with are often retreads of something we’ve seen or read before—without our realizing it. Toss out your first few ideas or at least keep massaging them until they’re no longer run-of-the-mill.
Examine your idea from every angle. Whenever I come up with an idea, I imagine it as a physical object that I can pick up and literally examine from all angles. Want to write about space explorers encountering monstrous creatures ala Alien? Instead of using the same story structure—alien monster stalks and kills the crew of a space ship one by one—try to come up with different angles. What if instead of exploring, the space travelers in your story work to keep other races from developing space travel so they won't encounter the alien monsters and face the extinction of their race? Or what if, instead of fearing the alien monsters they encounter, your space travelers decide these creatures are the pinnacle of evolution and decide to worship them? What if a religious schism occurs that results in a holy war? What if humans have wiped out the monster species from the galaxy—except for one specimen. What will they do with the last survivor? What if they decide to torture it as revenge for the billions of humans its species killed? You can take any common idea and make it uncommon by looking at it from as many angles as possible. Rub two unconnected ideas together and see what happens. Take two unconnected ideas—say, a firefighter experiences panic attacks whenever he or she tries to enter a burning building, and a child has terrible nightmares each night about a clown that stands at the foot of the bed, giggling softly. How do you make a single story out of these ideas? Damned if I know. I just made them up a couple moments ago. But I'd begin by exploring connections between them. Are the firefighter and the child related? Is the firefighter the child all grown up? Could the clown be connected with fire somehow? Maybe the child, terrified, tried to burn the clown one night and ended up burning down the house? Maybe now the adult firefighter is starting to hear a clown giggling whenever he or she tries to enter a burning building. I could keep going from here. Maybe I'd change the clown into something else since scary clowns are a cliché. Or maybe I'd have the clown be an image the child projected over the reality of an abusive father. I don't know. I'm not getting paid to work on this story, so I’m dropping it here. Any of you who want to steal it and run with it, feel free. If you do, just name the kid Timmy, okay? Write what you—and only you—know. Yeah, I know I covered this in the last chapter, but it's so important I thought I'd reiterate it here. Instead of drawing your ideas from the bottomless well of pop culture detritus we all have within us, try drawing ideas from your own experiences and observations. The more you can be aware of the things you see, think, and feel, the more you can develop stories only you can tell. For example, several years ago a group of workers from Florida moved into the apartment above where I was living at the time for a (thankfully) temporary stay. Five very sketchy-looking guys who were drunk every night and who exhibited some, shall we say, less-than-normal behavior. Eventually they moved out, but the experience of my wondering just what the hell they were doing up there every night gave me the idea for my Shirley Jackson
Award-nominated novella The Men Upstairs. I know the story is original, because a good part of it really happened, and it happened to me and only me out of all the people on the planet. (Well, technically, most of it happened above me, I suppose, but you get the point.) And just as I turned that experience into a horror story, you can take your experiences and, with a little imagination, turn them into ideas for your original stories. Get weird—like, really weird. Another way to write fiction that doesn't tread the same old ground is to use what I call in my creative writing classes advanced fiction-writing techniques. In the world of literary fiction, these techniques are sometimes lumped into a single category called experimental fiction because of their use of nontraditional narrative—or non-narrative or anti-narrative—approaches. But so many of these techniques have been used in the realm of literary fiction for so long that I’m not sure they actually qualify as experimental anymore. But most readers of horror fiction have likely encountered only a few of these techniques before—if any—making them perfect for horror writers looking to try something new and different. Grady Hendrix's Horror store, which is written in the style of an IKEA-like catalogue, is a prime example of the kind of techniques I'm talking about. Ryan Mecum’s Zombie Haiku, which recounts the experience of a man slowly turning into a zombie through the haikus he writes, is another. In one of my Supernatural tie-in books, The Roads Not Taken, I used the choose-your-own-adventure motif (although the publisher said that specific term is copyrighted, so they had to label the book as interactive fiction). The publisher had already decided to do an interactive fiction book featuring the Winchester brothers, and they approached me to write it. Originally, they wanted a book comprised of three to four separate stories. But I realized that since this was Supernatural, the multiple-story paths readers could choose from could actually be happening to Sam and Dean. So I proposed that I make the book a short novel with four sections that tied together into one overall story, in which a powerful evil entity was purposely putting the Winchesters through various paths of branching realities. The publisher loved the idea, and I got to have a lot of fun killing Sam and Dean in the various “wrong turn” paths.
All of the examples I've given use a technique called Formalism. This is when you tell a story using a different form of writing. You retell the story of Frankenstein in the form of young Victor's lab report for his high school science class. You tell the story of a character going mad by using Lipo-grammatic techniques—fiction that uses language as language to create different effects—to show the degeneration of his or her mind. Perhaps different parts of speech—articles, prepositions, pronouns, nouns, and finally verbs—disappear from the text as the character's mind increasingly deteriorates. Some of you might be saying, These are just gimmicks. That's not writing; that’s playtime. To which I reply, What's wrong with playing? Playing is using your imagination to try new things to see what happens. In other words, experimenting. What you come up with might not work, but then again, you might end up making something really cool. And while stories written using advanced techniques can be fun to read, they also expose readers to different narrative styles, thereby broadening their literary horizons. Some other types of advanced/experimental techniques include:

Metafiction. 

This is fiction about fiction. The Will Ferrell movie Stranger Than Fiction, in which a man discovers he's actually a character in a writer's new novel, is a good example of metafiction, as if the Daffy Duck cartoon “Duck A muck," in which Daffy has to contend with the mischievous actions of the narrator who's drawing him.

Nonlinear. 

These are stories in which the events are arranged in an order that doesn't follow the typical pattern of beginning-middle-end. Both the films Pulp Fiction and Memento use this technique.

Absurdism. 

Absurdism features situations that strengthen reality to ridiculous lengths. The film Rubber, about a living car tire that kills with its psychokinetic powers, is a great example. It also has fun meta-fictional aspects, too.

Surrealism. 

This is a field I plow quite often. These are stories which feature non-rational logic that is dreamlike and nightmarish. David Lynch's films fit into this category.

Cross-genre. 

This is fiction which blends elements from one or more genres. You've seen lots of stories like these—the Weird Western, the Occult Detective, etc. But there are all kinds of genres out there that people never think to combine with horror. One of my favorites is the film Fido, in which 1950's sitcoms are crossed with a zombie apocalypse scenario to create a story that’s not only funny as hell, but also a social commentary as well as a deeply moving character—centered piece. It's really quite wonderful. You can use these techniques as way to write an entire short story, but you can also use them to write scenes or entire chapters in novels. When you write about a character experiencing a terrifying hallucination or a disturbing nightmare, you can use surrealism. If you write one chapter as if it's a newspaper or magazine article-or perhaps a journal entry written by a character-you're employing formalism. Using techniques like these in novels from time to time can switch up the narrative, keeping it fresh and interesting for readers. When it comes time to use advanced techniques in my creative writing classes, I give students a list of ideas to choose from. I've included that list in the back of the book as Appendix E. Hopefully, it will give you some inspiration for trying out some alternative narrative techniques. (And if you do, I hope you have fun. Because even tortured scribes of blood, death, darkness, and insanity need to play every once and a while.)
Whatever your ultimate goal as a horror writer, the most important thing you can do for your readers and the genre is to learn to be yourself. It’s a lifelong journey, one we eventually must stop, but with any luck, we'll manage to create some damn good stories along the way.

EXERCISES

1. 

Take a look back at the last five horror novels and/or short stories you read. What made them similar to other horror stories you've read? What made them different? What made them stories only that particular author could tell?

2. 

Write down thirty to fifty story elements (more if you'd like), random things like cab driver, chicken coop, empty alley, broken wrist watch. Then write a list of horror archetypes like ghost, witch, vampire, haunted house and so forth. Next select a number of story elements from Appendix A and write them down. Cut them all out and put each type into a separate cup or bowl. Draw one from each container—a story element, a horror archetype, and a story situation. Write a story using these three items.

VOICES PROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What advice can you give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Cherry Weiner, literary agent

1. 

Fear. . . tension. . . to make the pages turn.

2. 

Read, read, read . . . learn . . . and then apply, but be open to suggestions on changes.

John Padgett, author of The Secret of Ventriloquism

1. 

The production of unease is key to effective horror. The more authentic the distillation of unease, the more powerful the horror story. That's why Lovecraft’s “The Music of Erich Zann" and Ligotti's “The Red Tower" always rank high when assessing both authors’ oeuvres. Derangement of what we consider “the natural order of things” is at the core of the best horror tales.

2. 

When I was young, I was convinced I was a good horror writer when in fact I was lousy at it. It's important to find a group of people who know their stuff and are willing to help you improve. Not just your friends and people who want to please you, but good writers and honest ones. If possible, find a mentor. I wasted a lot of time feeling self-satisfied when I should’ve been learning the craft. The flip side of that is this: if you are somebody who’s been struggling for a very long time and nobody’s taking your work, don’t despair. Or, alternately, do despair—but channel that despair. Use it. And fail. As Beckett says, “Try again. Fail again. Fail better."

Andrew Klavan, award-winning author of Nightmare Feast

I. 

For me, there are three essential elements to good scary writing. First, the idea itself should be scary. Pretty much anyone can make you cringe at something ugly or disgusting. Anyone can put a jump scare in a movie. Some people like that, but for me, it’s empty calories. I feel I should be able to just describe to you what the story's about and make you shudder or at least capture your attention. Next the plot should be good. The novel Dracula is so well constructed. The film The Ring is compelling. You have to know what’s going to happen next. And finally the character interaction. Shirley Jackson’s Haunting of Hill House lives off who the people are. The effects are secondary. If you have a scary idea, a strong, gripping plot, good characters, you're home free.

2. 

The best advice for writers in any field is: read (or watch) everything in that field. Study it. Break it down. Learn how the effects are created. Learn where the pleasure comes from. Even bad stuff can be instructive—sometimes more than good because its techniques are more obvious. Of course you need talent and inspiration, but when you come to the big scene, you always want to know you have the chops to pull it off, and you get that from studying the field. 

Owl Going back, author of Coyote Rage

1. 

The slow steady buildup of suspense. You need to allow the reader time to get familiar with the characters and setting, making them feel like they’re somehow part of the fictional world you've created. Once the reader is comfortable, and feeling right at home, you allow the terror to slowly seep in and spread like a numbing chill on a cold winter's night.

2. 

You have to make us care about the characters, otherwise we won't care what happens to them. The characters have to be likeable, or there has to be something familiar about them to which we can relate. When we read, we put ourselves alongside the characters, sharing their adventures, experiencing their fears and pains. That's hard to do with someone we don't like and have nothing in common.

CHAPTER SEVEN

WHERE NO MONSTER HAS GONE BEFORE

Throughout the preceding chapters, I've used the term monstrous distortion to identify the element of horror in a story. When I was a kid, I referred to all horror films as monster movies, whether they had literal monsters in them or not. Let's talk some more about striving for originality in horror fiction, this time as it applies to building better monsters for your stories. First off, tattoo this on your forehead (in reverse letters so you can read it in a mirror): horror stories aren't about monsters— they're about how characters react to monsters (or to becoming monsters themselves). Imagine a story that only has a monster in it. No people. The monster stands around with nothing to do. Now imagine a story with only a person in it. But this person thinks there's a monster somewhere nearby, that it's coming closer by the minute, and if this person doesn't do something fast, they're dead meat. Monster-Only Scenario: No story. Human-Only Scenario: Story. Again, the story is about how characters react to the monster (even an imaginary one). Or to use the vocabulary I've already established, how they react to the monstrous distortion. Never forget this. It's one of the most important things about writing horror you can learn. Our good friend Wikipedia tells us that a monster is “any creature . . . that is often hideous and may produce physical fear or physical harm by its appearance and/or its actions, The word ‘monster’ derives from the Latin monstrum, meaning an aberrant occurrence, usually biological, that was taken as a sign that something was wrong within the natural order. The word usually connotes something wrong or evil; a monster is generally morally objectionable, physically or psychologically hideous, and/or a freak of nature." The prime qualities of a monster—literal or symbolic, human or inhuman—are Ugliness, Distortion, Violence, Cruelty, Savagery, Wildness, and Otherness. Anything can become a monster in your stories if you imbue it with one or more of these qualities. A fantastic example of this is Charlotte Perkins Gilman‘s classic story “The Yellow Wallpaper." If you haven't read it yet, do so immediately. I'll be here when you're finished.

(Hums to self. Checks the time. Hums some more.)

Okay, now that you're back, let's talk about specific ways to use monsters in your fiction. Monster as Threat/Obstacle. Most monsters are presented in stories as a threat to the protagonist or, if the protagonist is an adventure character, as an obstacle in his or her way to obtaining some important goal. Unless slaying the monster is the goal. But there are other ways to use monsters, too. Monster as Metaphor/Symbol/Theme. Moby Dick is probably the most famous monster in literature. And while he definitely is a threat to the characters in the novel, the whale isn't an obstacle on the way to something else. Tracking down and slaying the beast is Ahab‘s goal. But the mad captain’s deeper goal is to get revenge on Moby Dick for taking his leg. The whale is white. Bones are white. Therefore, Moby Dick is a symbol of . . . you got it! Death. You can see different themes in the story, all of them embodied by the whale and Ahab‘s obsession with it. One thing is that seeking revenge ultimately destroys the seeker—and anyone foolish enough to join in the seeker’s obsession. Another theme is that Death takes us all a piece a time as the years pass, and while we can rage at Death all we want, we can’t defeat it, and in the end, it will claim us all—and it will take us sooner rather than later if we’re dumb enough to go looking for it. Did Melville have these themes in mind when he wrote his novel? Damned if I know. But Moby Dick is a great example of how a monster can embody a theme, thereby making a story stronger and deeper. As a writer, you can create your monster with a theme in mind, figure out what your theme is during the course of writing and revise the portrayal of your monster to better fit that theme, or you can just write without worrying about a theme and see if one emerges. And if it does, then perhaps revise your monster to suit the theme in your next draft. 

Monster as Protagonist. 

I’m not talking about an urban fantasy novel in which a werewolf cop fights crime. I'm talking about a monster as the protagonist. A great example of this is Rob Zombie's film The Devil's Rejects. (Bet you never thought you’d see Herman Melville and Rob Zombie referenced in the same book, let alone only a few lines from each other!) In Zombie‘s movie, three members of a family of serial killers are hunted by a sheriff who wants revenge on them for killing his brother (and around seventy-five other people). Sometimes the audience's sympathies lie with the sheriff, other times with the killers. This shifting back and forth between who's the protagonist and who's the antagonist is one of the things that make this movie work so well. By using a monster as a protagonist, you can defy audience expectation, allowing you to create a story that's exciting and unpredictable, and which—if the audience finds themselves rooting for the monster—may make them feel more than a little uncomfortable.

Monster as an Object of Pity. 

Frankenstein's Monster is the most well-known example of this in literature, but my favorite is the narrator from Richard Matheson’s classic short story “Born of Man and Woman.” The main character is a mutant child whose parents have locked away in the basement. While outwardly a monster, inside the child has perfectly normal thoughts, feelings, and needs. Not only is the character an object of reader sympathy, he or she (the gender isn't specified) is also a metaphor for how child abuse can create monsters. 

Science-Based Monster VS. Supernatural Monsters. 

I love all types of monsters, but I tend to gravitate toward supernatural ones in my reading and writing. Modern readers in general are probably more likely to suspend their disbelief for a science—based monster, though, because science exists and the supernatural doesn’t. (No offense to those of you who believe in the supernatural, but I don’t and it's my book.) So using a science-based monster can allow you to reach a wider audience and have your work regarded as a thriller instead of horror. (Thriller is a marketing label that's more palatable to readers who, for whatever reason, dislike the term horror.) The science in Jurassic Park—the books and the movies—is complete nonsense in terms of actually being able to work. But dinosaurs are—or rather were—real, DNA is real, cloning is real (if, in its infancy, as a technology). Because of this, readers are willing to buy into the method of how the dinosaurs are created. I think supernatural monsters offer a writer more imaginative possibilities, but since I write that kind of stuff, I would think that, wouldn't I?

Human Monsters. 

I've discussed before that some readers prefer realistic horror, and human monsters definitely fall into that category. One of the things to be careful about when using human monsters in a story is to not make them into cliches. The abusive husband. The aggrieved loner with a gun. The manipulative sociopath. I'm not saying you can't use recognizable types of human monsters. After all, they exist in real life. But in real life, they're people, not primal forces of evil as might be found in supernatural horror. Strive to give your human monsters individual characteristics. Your human monsters will have jobs, family, friends (unless they prefer to be alone), hobbies and interests. They will have goals and dreams beyond whatever terrible acts they commit. The assassin-for-hire in Lawrence Block's Keller series is an avid stamp collector. Hannibal Lector is a psychiatrist. Cruella de Ville is obsessed with fashion. Norman Bates runs a small motel and is shy and unsure of himself. Heath Ledger's iteration of the Joker in The Dark Knight sees himself as an agent of chaos. Instead of seeking personal gain, his motivation is philosophical. Human monsters’ characteristics can be part of the monstrous distortion in the story, they can complement it, or serve as a counterpoint to it. The homicidal madman in The Stepfather is a great example of a human monster that has a personality of his own. He wants nothing more than to be part of a perfect family. But no family can ever match his ideal, and when they inevitably disappoint them, he kills them and moves on to another family and tries again. Francis Dolarhyde in Thomas Harris’ Red Dragon is another. Dolarhyde is a serial killer who murders entire families, but during the course of the novel he strikes up a relationship with a coworker, and we see the human part of him struggling to overcome the monstrous side of his nature. The Merry Widow Murderer in Alfred Hitchcock's Shadow of a Doubt has a relationship with his young niece that deteriorates as the film goes on. Michael Shannon's character in The Shape of Water is another great example of a human monster, contrasted with the peaceful, gentle Creature from the Black Lagoon-like being he torments. Maybe your serial killer character was abused as a child and will do anything to protect children—including killing parents that he or she views as abusive, even if the rest of the world wouldn't. Or maybe your terrorist character has a younger sister he or she loves more than anything else in the world—including the cause the terrorist otherwise fights so hard for. Or maybe your racist murderer respects old people and is always courteous to them, even the ones he or she intends to kill. Developing the human part of your human monster will not only make your character seem more real to readers, their monstrous distortion (whatever it may be) will seem even worse when contrasted with their humanity. I'm not saying you need to make your human monsters into heroes that the audience roots for (although you can). But I am saying you should make this type of character as fully developed as any others in your story. Need inspiration for your human monsters? Watch true-crime documentaries and read true-crime accounts in books and on online. jack Ketchum based a number of his novels on real crime cases. If you're sensitive, be careful not to OD on true-crime material, I was researching a thriller novel years ago, so I watched a documentary on serial killers. During an interview, one killer talked about a little boy he'd murdered and said, “I kind of felt sorry for him.” There was absolutely no human emotion in the man‘s voice, and his eyes were as cold as a shark’s. I turned off the program and abandoned the book project. That was an abyss I did not want to look into any longer. I’m okay with supernatural horror because the unreal nature of it provides a mental and emotional buffer for me. But real-life crime? I have to make sure to handle that with care. It’s possible to mix human monsters with supernatural ones in a story, although it takes skill to pull off this combination. I did this in my novel The Way of All Flesh, in which one of the survivors of a zombie apocalypse is a serial killer who resents the zombies for being better heralds of death than he could ever be. Lynn Hortel does a fantastic job balancing human and supernatural monsters in her novel Throwback, and I highly recommend you check it out if you haven’t already read it. 

Single Monster vs. a Race of Monsters. 

It's damn hard to have a zombie apocalypse with only one zombie. On the other hand, I've talked before about how Alien (one monster) is a horror film and Aliens (many monsters) is more an action-adventure tale. Josh Malerman’s Bird Box wouldn't be the same story with only one monster, and neither would Tim Lebbon’s The Silence. But if Michael Myers was the leader of a battalion of masked killers in Halloween, the movie would become ridiculous. Go whichever route seems best to you for an individual story, but the more monsters there are in your story, the more often readers will be exposed to them and the more known they'll become as the tale progresses. So keeping your characters’ encounters with the monsters to a minimum—especially early on in a story—will help preserve a sense of mystery and keep your monsters from being too familiar to your readers too soon. Having a specific set of behaviors, strengths, and weaknesses for your race of monsters will help you keep their appearances in your story consistent, even if you’re the only one who knows what the “rules” are. But if you want your story to be a Hell-on-Earth scenario—like in the Zach Snyder remake of Dawn of the Dead—then monster it up all you want. Sometimes excess is exactly what a story calls for.

Monster Off-Stage vs. Monster Center Stage. 

The fantasy novelist Dennis L. McKiernan was one of my mentors, and he once told me that Sauron from The Lord of the Rings trilogy was the perfect villain because he never appears on the page as a character. He's an all-powerful nebulous force that the heroes must contend with. But in The Texas Chainsaw Massacre, Leatherface is very much present in the story, and is a focused, contained force that characters can attempt to deal with face to face. Both of these approaches to monsters can work well depending on the type of story you're telling. The advantage to keeping your monster oi? stage for the most part is you can create suspense until the confrontation point, when your characters must face the monster. jaws does this exceptionally well. The shark strikes from hiding throughout the movie, and it isn't until right before the climax that we finally get to really see the creature—right when the characters must confront it up close and personal. The shark is a force until the end, when it's presented as a physical thing that can be dealt with. Pennywise in It appears regularly to taunt and torment characters, but it manifests in various guises. It's a creature hidden behind multiple masks, and even Pennywise isn’t its true face. By showing Pennywise more often in the story, King can show us its faces being stripped away until the characters‘ final encounter with the monster, when its true face is revealed. The real creature behind the clown facade is kept off stage until the end of the book, but its disguises appear on stage throughout. King mixes these two styles to great effect in the novel. By showing your monster often, you risk having it become too familiar to the audience, thus diluting its impact as the story progresses. (King avoids this in It by having different guises of the creature appear throughout.) But if your monster remains a vague, amorphous threat that has no effect whatsoever on the story until the very end, your audience will get bored. Effective use of monsters comes down to what sort of story you want to tell, and then making sure you measure out your monster‘s on-stage appearances—and what type of appearances they will be—accordingly.

Primal Monsters vs. More Complex Monsters. 

The entities that plague the family in Poltergeist are primal forces, like an earthquake or hurricane. They have no individual identities, no personalities, no clearly explained goals. Why do they manifest? Why do they appear in only one house in that neighborhood? Why do they torment this particular family? What exactly do they want? There are a couple lines about the entities wanting to keep Carol Anne close to them because they envy the life within her, but that's about it. Primal forces don’t need an explanation. There’s no motivation to an earthquake, hurricane, or tornado. They just happen. A zombie horde is primal, too, but in a slightly more complex way. They’re like a swarm of ravenous insects. Their sole motivation is to feed. They might have a drive to reproduce, but spreading their contagion is usually portrayed as a side effect of their hunger rather than a specific need. They operate under a clear set of rules—albeit simple ones. So does the entity in It Follows. Animal monsters like the shark in jaws, the dinosaurs in Jurassic Park, or the lions in The Ghost and the Darkness (although there are hints these lions may be—at least in part—supernatural manifestations) are primal forces. They're animals doing what animals do. But when you begin adding intelligence into the mix, a monster can be driven by more than primal needs. King Kong falls in love with Ann Darrow. In a number of Dracula movies, the count seeks to reunite with the reincarnation of his lost love. This same motif occurs in a lot of mummy movies. Ghosts might have a specific goal they wish to accomplish before they can finally rest. Frankenstein’s Monster wants to be accepted as human. Failing that, he wants the doctor to create a mate for him, and when that doesn't work out, he wants to take revenge on Frankenstein, whom he views as a parent who abandoned him. The more complex your monster becomes, the more potential there is for story development and interaction with other characters. But the tradeoff is that the more complex monsters become, the less they embody primal forces. They're smaller, more constrained threats. In the novel Dracula, the count only menaces a handful of people (as opposed to Kim Newman’s Anna Dracula, where he is portrayed as a primal force, and he and his kind take over the world). The Frankenstein Monster is primarily only a danger to his creator and his creator’s family. The dark folk in Ray Bradbury’s Something Wicked This Way Comes are only a threat to the citizens of the town they visit, and the story only focuses closely on a few of those people. The demon in The Exorcist is primarily a threat only to the girl it possesses, although it can interact with other characters by speaking through her. The combination of greater complexity and small-scale threat allows you to tell more intimate stories where you can focus on the monster’s effect on a handful of characters in more detail. You can show the horror the characters experience and the toll it takes on them. A primal force such as a Kaiju can destroy an entire city, but it can never have a close relationship—or indeed, any kind of relationship—with its victims. I tend to make my monsters primal forces that can also interact with my character to a certain degree. For example, in my novel The Forever House, the monsters are a family of creatures known as the Eldred who are basically psychic vampires (not that I ever call them that). They are beings who can interact with humans. But inside their house, they are godlike creatures that can manipulate reality. They still possess physical bodies, though, so they can be wounded or killed. So you can have avatars of primal forces that can interact with characters. That way, you can have your cake and eat it, too. 

Mmmmm, cake.

Horror Tropes Deconstructed. 

One of the most effective ways to create monsters is to deconstruct a trope, to reduce it to its core essence and then build your own monster from that core. For example, the trope of a demon can be reduced down to the core concept of a Tormentor. Think of all the different ways you can build a monster using the idea of a Tormentor. Maybe the monster forces people to relive their worst memories over and over. Maybe it causes its victims to become suicidal. Maybe it causes them to experience severe panic attacks. Maybe it torments characters by causing ill fortune to all the people they love. Maybe it assumes the form of a character—or possesses a character's body—and goes about behaving in such a way as to ruin the character's life. (And in these examples, you can see how I always try to find some kind of emotional connection between monsters and their victims. This strengthens the emotional core of a story.) The curse put on the main character of Stephen King's Thinner is the act of a Tormentor. Jigsaw in the Saw film franchise is another—although he sees what he does as not tormenting others for its own sake but in order to teach them to appreciate life. (Couldn't he have just written a self-help book?) Here's a list of horror tropes reduced to their prime underlying quality. I'm sure it's far from complete, but it should give you some things to work with.

Predator

Agent of Death (Deathbringer)

Transformer (of Others, of Self)

Duality of Self-Existence

Tormentor

Tempter/Corrupter

Controller

Disease-Spreader

Agent of Decay slash Entropy

Embodiment of Pure Evil

Embodiment of Wildness/Cruelty/Indifference of Nature/the Universe

Agent of Chaos

Violator of Reality

Agent of Afterlife

The Lifeless Comes to Life

Conqueror

Opposing Force

Physical Threat

Emotional Psychological Threat

Spiritual Threat

Elemental Force

Threat of Others: Community, Family, Lovers, Parents, Children

Here are a few examples from literature and film to demonstrate the different ways core tropes can be used to create different monsters.

Duality of Self: The Wolf Man, Jekyll and Hyde, Norman Bates, Hannibal Lector, Dead Ringers, Transcendence.

Threat of Others: Community, Family, Lovers, Parents, Children, Invasion of the Body Snatchers, “The Lottery,” Frankenstein, Fatal Attraction, The Stepfather, Changelings, The Purge.

The Lifeless Comes to Life: The Golem, Frankenstein, HAL from 2001, Christine, Chucky, The Lift/the Shaft (a killer elevator).

Put new clothes on old tropes. Something else you can do is take a horror archetype (a vampire, werewolf, etc.) and disguise it, or as I sometimes say, put a new set of clothes on it. By doing this, you can retain the archetypes power and make it seem fresh and new by shedding its old—and often clichéd—image. To give you an idea of what I’m talking about, here are some popular movie monsters and the archetypes they're based on.

Jason = Grim Reaper. Jason’s hockey mask is like a skull face. He wears a dark one-piece outfit similar to the Reaper’s robe. He wields a large, sharp metal weapon, and he arrives unexpectedly to take life.

Freddie Kruger = Satan. Freddie is associated with fire and the afterlife. His claw-like glove is like a trident. His fire-scarred face is a demonic visage. He delights in torturing his victims in nightmare scenarios. His motivation is to punish the children of the people who murdered him. In other words, he wants to punish sin (or at least what he sees as sin).

Hannibal Lector = Dracula. Lector is highly intelligent and highly cultured. Almost nobility. (And in the TV series he has an accent.) Beneath his facade of humanity is a creature who feeds on humans. He's a psychiatrist so he can manipulate people's minds, similar to how Dracula can mesmerize his victims.

Norman Bates = Werewolf. Norman is a seemingly harmless man who undergoes a psychological transformation into a killer— a change he’s not even aware of. He even changes his appearance by donning different clothes and putting on a wig.

Each of these characters retain the power of the archetype they’re based on without it being diluted by the audience’s over-familiarity with it. You can do the same thing with your own monstrous creations.

Reverse a trope. 

Another technique you can use to create an interesting, unique monster is to reverse a trope. In a sense, this is what Hammer Films did in their series of Frankenstein movies starring Peter Cushing. The trope of Frankenstein's Monster is the Lifeless Comes to Life. It is given life. Hammer made Dr. Frankenstein the monster in the series, instead of a specific creation of his. They reversed the trope. Instead of the monster being a creation given life, the "monster" in the film series is that which gives life to other beings—with disastrous consequences, of course. Here are some examples of reversed-trope monsters to demonstrate how this technique works.

Reverse-Vampire: Creature that infuses life force into victims.

Reverse-Werewolf: Creature that transforms others.

Reverse-Ghost: Creature that releases spirits from others.

Reverse-Cannibal: Person who wants to forcibly feed himself or herself to others. (This one would make a truly messed-up story!)

Combine tropes of elements of tropes. You can also combine several deconstructed tropes or aspects of tropes to build your monster. A couple examples:

Zombies: Predator, Agent of Death, Agent of Decay/Entropy, Disease-Spreader, Transformer of Others, Threat of Others, Violator of Reality, Agent of Afterlife, Embodiment of Indifference of Universe.

John Carpenter's The Thing: Predator, Transformer of Others, Threat of Others, Opposing Force, Conqueror, Violator of Reality, Agent of Chaos.

Use tropes from other sources. Most horror writers rely on the same old tropes they've been exposed to since childhood, but the world is filled with myths and legends that can make excellent inspiration for stories. And it's not like researching folklore is difficult. If you look up vampire on Wikipedia, it will lead you to a page called “List of Vampires in Folklore.” This is an alphabetical list of vampires from global folklore. I used it to select a type of vampire to write about for one of Jonathan Maberry’s V- Wars anthologies. One of my favorite vampires—which I haven't used in a story yet—is the pennanggalan from Southeast Asia. This vampire’s head detaches from its body, dragging its internal organs along with it, and flies through the night in search of blood. And there are even freakier vampires out there. All it takes is a little research and reading, and you’ll have an interesting and fresh monster for your fiction. Here are a couple other suggestions for finding monstrous inspiration.

Nature: 

There are all kinds of bizarre animals in the world, and you can use them as inspirations for your monsters. You don't have to literally use the animals as the monsters. You can use their traits and behaviors as inspiration. For example, the Pacific barrel eye is a fish that has a transparent head. Its head is housed in a clear fluid-filled shield and its eyes are protected within. Even weirder, its eyes can rotate within the shield and remain focused on an object when the fish switches from a vertical to a horizontal position. So imagine a creepy humanoid with a transparent, fluid-filled head with eyes that can move around, allowing it to see in any direction. I found the Pacific barrel eye by doing a simple Google search on weirdest fish. Use search terms like weird, strange, bizarre, etc. coupled with terms like animals, mammals, lizards, insects, birds, fish, etc., and you'll find some excellent ideas for monsters. (This also works for creating aliens in science fiction stories or monsters and nonhuman races in fantasy tales.)

Urban Legends: 

There are thousands of urban legends around the world, and any number of them can make great fodder for horror stories, whether you use the urban legend itself or simply use it to inspire your own creation. One of my favorite urban legends is Dr. Crow and the Melon Heads. (Sounds like a band, doesn't it?) In Ohio (my home state!), Michigan, and Connecticut, stories are told of Melon Heads, small humanoid creatures that, as their name plainly says, have bulbous melon-shaped heads. In Ohio, the Melon Heads were supposedly created by a sinister figure known as Dr. Crow. Crow experimented on children, turning them into big-headed monsters. I haven't found a story to use them in yet, but maybe someday. Do an Internet search for urban legends in states, provinces, etc., then urban legends in individual countries, then urban legends worldwide. You’ll find more material for horror fiction than you’ll be able to use in one lifetime.

Writing your monster. 

Once you’ve created your monster, you need to put it into a story. Here are a few things to consider when incorporating monsters into fiction.

Concrete Rules vs. the Power of the Unknown: 

Do you want to give your monster very specific rules that it must operate by? Simple rules can work well. Someone has to say Beetlejuice‘s name three times in order to free him to act in the world of the living. You have to say Bloody Mary's name thirteen times while looking in a mirror to summon her. Why rules like these exist at all or why monsters and spirits are bound to them is never explained. The audience always takes them as a given. Vampires—at least the classical European version—have a ton of rules to abide by, making them in many ways one of the most vulnerable monsters. They have to sleep in the soil of their homeland, they are helpless during the day, they can be destroyed by sunlight, holy artifacts repel them, holy water burns them, a stake through the heart can kill them, silver can injure or kill them, fire can kill them, they can't cross running water, they don't cast reflections or shadows, garlic repels them, they can’t enter a private domicile unless invited, they can't enter a holy building or set foot on a holy site, etc. No wonder modern writers of horror usually eschew most of these rules when putting vampires into their stories. Too many rules limit your monsters and make it too easy for your characters to understand them, then battle and defeat them. Plus giving monsters too many rules—or any, for that matter—robs them of the power of the unknown as well as the power of being a primal force. You don't have to go by pre-established rules for monsters. You can create your own rules. For example, in Ray Garton‘s novels Ravenous and its sequel Bestial, lycanthropy is a sexually transmitted condition instead of being spread via a bite.

Specific, Vivid Details: 

Using effective details can anchor any element of fiction in reality, but it’s even more vital when you’re writing about unreal things. How much you describe your monster depends on the effect you're striving for. If you want your monster to remain mysterious and to build suspense for your reader, you might only describe a single detail: From the other side of the door, I heard a snuffling, like a dog inhaling deeply, trying to catch a scent, only this sound was higher-pitched. For some reason it made me think of a rodent—a very large rodent. One thing—the snuffling sound—but described in specific (and hopefully creepy) detail. If your monster moves fast, your character might only get quick, fragmented impressions of it: It came at Eloise swiftly—a mass of fur and muscle, with wickedly-curved claws, sharp yellow teeth, and feral yellow eyes. God, those eyes! Filter the details through the viewpoint of a character perceiving the monster, and remember that people—especially stressed and frightened people—won’t pick up every detail of your monster on first sighting it. If a dog ran across the street in front of your car, how much specific detail about it could you remember? Especially if you'd never seen a dog before and had no idea what it was.

Setting Environment: 

You wouldn't expect a werewolf to live at the bottom of the ocean, nor would you expect to find the Creature from the Black Lagoon climbing the Empire State Building. Monsters, like ordinary animals, are shaped by evolution (or supernatural forces) to fit their environments, whether biologically, symbolically, or thematically. You wouldn't expect to find a banshee in Texas. She's a part of Irish folklore and belongs in Ireland. Putting monsters where they don’t belong can create some interesting story possibilities, though, as when Universal's Mummy ended up in the Louisiana swamps for a couple of movies, or vampires prey on people in the arctic in Thirty Days of Night. If your monster is a physical creature bound by physical laws, make sure wherever you put the damn thing, it has enough food and water to sustain it. How Kaiju like Godzilla and friends ever find enough food and fresh water to stay alive is one of the world’s great mysteries. Same for the desert-dwelling dinosaurs in The Valley of Gwangi. And how could the big carnivores—like the allosaurus Gwangi himself—find enough prey to live on in the relatively small (and barren) valley the dinosaurs inhabited? They’d wipe out the herbivores (which probably couldn't exist in the first place because there wouldn't be enough plant life for them to eat), attack each other, and whichever was the last carnivore standing would eventually starve to death.

Motivation: 

What does your monster want? Why does it do what it does? I've never understood why monsters in horror stories—especially movies—spend so much time stalking their prey. If they're so damn powerful, they should just immediately attack someone and kill them. The only reason they stalk is to increase the tension for the audience. If you want to make your monster believable, give them a reason why they hunt and kill the way they do, not a reason that’s simply convenient for the story.

Abilities: 

What can your monster do? What are its weapons and its defenses? If it's intelligent, what sort of experience or skills does it have to go with any unnatural powers?

Weaknesses: 

These can he physical, magical, supernatural or any combination. The Cenobites in Hellraiser have only two weaknesses. They can only appear in our world when someone solves the puzzle of the Lament Configuration, and they can only be sent back to whatever dark dimension they call home when someone puts the Lament Configuration into a different pattern. This is a supernatural weakness (or limitation, if you prefer) with a physical component—the Lament Configuration. Weaknesses like this are good ones to explain—even if it's never spelled out—why creatures like the Cenobites haven‘t already conquered our world and rule over us as sadomasochistic gods. (By the way, speaking of deconstructed tropes, what magical creatures can only be summoned by a small object someone touches? Genies. That's what the Cenobites are, except you won't like the kind of wishes they grant. Or maybe you would. Who am I to judge?)

Monsters—in whatever form they manifest—are the lifeblood of horror. I hope this chapter has given you some different ways to look at monsters and some new tools for imagining them into existence. Now go forth and release your terrifying creations upon an unsuspecting world! [Cue evil genius laugh.] Muhahahahahahaaaaaah!

EXERCISES

Pick a well—used monster, one that you've never particularly liked or have gotten sick of. Then:

1. 

Deconstruct it to identify its core essence.

2. 

Disguise it.

3. 

Reverse it.

4. 

Combine it with another monster trope.

VOICES PROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Edward Lee, author of White Trash Gothic Part Two

1. 

“Good,” of course, is subjective, it’s a gray area. It varies from one individual to another. The Eye of the beholder. It's not a cliché. Stay true to your Eye and your horror fiction stands a much greater chance of being good.

2. 

The same advice that’s been given to me many times back in the day, and it's still universal: only write the kind of novel that you would want to read. If you write outside of your areas of interest, it will show and, hence, stink. It will show because it will be obvious to the reader that you're trying to write something just because it's marketable. Never write anything that your creative heart isn't deeply into. The name of the game is entertaining your readers, and that can't happen unless you entertain yourself.

Melissa Lason, co-author of Those Who Follow

1. 

Good horror pulls you into the story and makes you believe, even if it's for only a little while, that you are living the most unreal scenarios and nightmares alongside the characters.

2. 

A tip for effective writing is, your settings can be just as deadly and unforgiving as your monster/psycho/demon etc. Don't neglect them, let them be accomplices in whatever Hell you put your characters through, or even vice versa, let them be a light in the darkness. It helps shape the whole experience of being immersed in a story.

Matt Hayward, author of What Do Monsters Fear?

1.

Good horror comes from empathy. When we care for someone, in this case a character, we don’t want to see them threatened. Creating three-dimensional characters the reader cares for is any book's main ingredient. Couple that with an entertaining scenario and you've got the right recipe.

2. 

Write what you know. Too often, this advice is misconstrued as something occupational, but we all know fear, we know love and grief and a thousand other emotional pinpricks we struggle to put into words. And that's the job: to write your story. Your unique perception is paramount to discovering your voice.

Jeani Rector, editor of The Horror Zine

1.

I seek stories that have a great "creep factor.” Sometimes not seeing the monster is more effective than exposing it in your face. Atmosphere and emotions are really important; you know the monster is just around the corner. I try to place myself into my character's shoes. How would I feel if I were faced with the character's situation? Authenticity is paramount. Fear is contagious; if the character is deathly afraid, then the reader will be afraid. What can make for a great horror story is the use of an unusual monster. It can be anything from insects to golems to carpets that eat people (yes, I once received a great story about carpet because the writer had a fantastic imagination and thought outside the box of convention). If the subject is more common, like ghosts, zombies, or vampires, it will need a fresh twist on the genre. But lots of readers love ghosts, zombies, and vampires.

2.

All stories need a “hook” in the first three paragraphs. That is usually the length of time a reader will “try out” your work. If they are not grabbed and absorbed within the first three paragraphs, they could stop reading and go elsewhere. From there, I can only tell you what I look for personally when I receive submissions for possible publication. First and foremost, if the first paragraph is devoted to descriptions or (horrors!) a rambling account of history (the why the story is being told), I immediately reject it without reading any further because it tends to give the story a dull “hook.” I recommend starting the first paragraph smack in the middle of the story, in the middle of the action, and then gradually weave the descriptions and history into the body of the story That sort of thing takes talent to achieve but the results are satisfying. Here is what, in my opinion, makes for a successful short story: a) start with action; b) familiarize the reader with your protagonist, making him or her likeable; c) provide an obstacle for your protagonist; d) describe how your protagonist overcomes, or at least deals with, the obstacle; e) provide a chase scene (optional, but sure adds excitement); f) give the reader hints as to the ending; g) provide a completely different ending than your hints. It is also important to balance the amount of dialogue to the amount of action. Too much dialogue and you are “telling” the story instead of “showing” the story. Telling the story could put you in danger of using a passive voice. There is no suspense to an event that has already taken place. I seek stories that reveal events as they occur; the story described as it is happening.

CHAPTER EIGHT

THE HORROR WRITER'S PALETTE

The Canadian sketch comedy troupe Kids in the Hall once did a bit on horror writing called "Boo!" You can find it on YouTube, so if you haven't seen it, go watch it now. Done? Okay. For those of you who didn't go watch it, I'll summarize the sketch. A writer is sitting at his typewriter, working on a scary novel while his wife sits knitting on the couch nearby. When he's finished, he pulls the page from the typewriter, places it on a stack of other pages, and carries it over to his wife. He sits on the couch next to her, hands her his manuscript, and as she reads it, he nervously waits for her reaction. The first page is the title page. It says Boo! by Donald Bane. The wife then looks at the novel's first (and only) page. In large capital letters it says “BOO!” She gasps and jumps. Boo! is published, becomes a number-one bestseller, and Donald struggles to write a follow-up novel. He finally comes up with Hey, There's a Spider on Your Back! It's published and everyone who reads it frantically brushes an imaginary spider off their shoulder. The point of the sketch is that no matter how scary a story is, no one is really afraid while they read it. They know they're reading and that a particular arrangement of letters on a page can't hurt them. Yes, there are people who react emotionally to the stories they read (or watch), but they know deep down that they're only playing a game of pretend using the words and ideas writers have given them. This is even more true for experienced horror fans. People who find horror too harrowing to read or watch avoid it. So the idea that horror writers are literally trying to scare their audience is a silly one. Horror writers write about fear, and while our readers might experience a shudder or two, or grimace in revulsion when reading our stories, they aren't deluded like the people in the "Boo!" sketch.
This doesn't mean that our audience can't empathize with our characters as they go through some pretty awful experiences, though. We'll talk about creating effective characters in Chapter Eleven. Right now, I want to discuss the five emotional states horror writers can use in their fiction, along with their strengths and drawbacks, and why and when you'd choose one over the other. You can think of them like five primary colors that painters have to work with (which is where I got the title for the chapter, obs). These “colors” are Dread, Terror, Horror, Shock, and Disgust.
I'm going to continue capitalizing the five emotional states throughout this chapter, so if that bugs you, you'll just have to live with it. I've arranged the five states beginning with the most sophisticated, literary technique (Dread) to the most primal technique (Disgust). I don't mean to indicate that one emotional state is superior to another—although other writers might. As far as I'm concerned, they all have their place in horror, just as all the colors have a place on the painter‘s palette. I tend to use a blend of all of them, especially in my novels. Let’s get started.

Dread. 

Dread is the mounting anticipation of a threat—nebulous and not clearly understood—drawing ever closer. Nineteenth-century ghost stories drip with Dread, as do Lovecraft's best stories. The films of David Lynch—along with Twin Peaks—also employ Dread to great effect. The 1963 movie version of Shirley Jackson's The Haunting of H ill House is perhaps the finest depiction of Dread on film, and Mike Flanagan's reimagining of the story for his Netflix series is also Dread-full, in the best sense of the word. Paul Tremblay does a wonderful job of building Dread in his novels, and if you haven't checked out his work yet, you should. A Game of Thrones uses this technique with its famous tagline Winter is coming. The Paranormal Activity films are all about Dread, as is The Blair Witch Project. The definition I've used for Dread tells you not only what it is but also presents a mini-outline of how a Dread-based story (or scene) should go: The mounting anticipation of a threat—nebul0us and not clearly understood—drawing over closer. In film, this is sometimes referred to as slow-burn horror. In a Dread-based story, the monstrous distortion is hinted at using small details at first. A set of keys that are always found in different locations in the house each time you go looking for them. One clock in the office that stops at the same time every day, no matter how often you reset it. A dark stain on a shirt that can't be removed with repeated washings. Characters notice these slight violations of reality, but they try to convince themselves they mean nothing. The violations become increasingly larger and harder to ignore, until they become dangerous. Characters can no longer deny something is seriously wrong, and they try to deal with the situation by investigating it, fighting it, or—if they're smart—by getting the hell away from it. Many audience members hate Dread-based stories because they move at a slow pace and, as they complain, “Nothing happens." They’re not wrong. The mounting part of Dread’s definition, along with drawing ever closer describes a slow build-up. And in a story that uses Dread as its main technique to evoke horror, the threat may never actually arrive—or if it does, it may not be seen onstage. This leaves the audience in an unresolved state of Dread. Shirley Jackson’s “The Summer People” is an excellent example of this. (Read it ASAP if you're unfamiliar with it. Read it again if you are because it's awesome.) Readers and viewers who enjoy Dread-filled stories enjoy the feeling of Dread, of being in that emotional state, and they have no desire to leave it—at least until the climax of a story, and maybe not even then. If you write Dread-based horror stories, you might have a smaller audience. Most modern horror readers don’t have the patience for these kinds of tales, although Dread does work well in the thriller and suspense genres, where readers tend to want the darker elements of a story to be softer and more muted.
A short story can use Dread exclusively and horror readers won't mind, though. They don't need to be patient too long in order to get through a short story. But the longer a story gets, the harder it is for most modern readers to continue with Dread, and if you're writing a gigantic door-stop of a novel, a lot of modern readers won't finish it. Dread can work well for modern readers of novels if it's used as one narrative tool among a host of others, though. A Dread based scene or chapter works just fine for them. I think writing Dread takes great skill. Writers of Dread-based fiction need to have a heightened sense of how to use language and imagery in subtle ways to create the effect they want, and they need to have a strong sense of pacing to keep the story moving at just the right speed—not too fast, and not too slow.

Terror. 

Terror is a deep emotional and intellectual reaction to a threat. This is what Lovecraft’s characters experience at the end of stories where they are confronted by the Awful Thing and What That Awful Thing Reveals About the Nature of Existence and Humanity’s Place in It. I felt it at the end of Being john Malkovich when I realized what the long-term consequences the ending implied for John Cusack’s character (which is one of the reasons I've never re-watched the film). A character in a story might experience terror when they discover their lover has been replaced by an evil doppelganger. Not only are they like, “Eek! This is a monster, not my honeybunch!" They also realize their lover is probably dead. And they might realize that other people around them could be doppelgangers, too. Maybe everyone is a doppelganger. Maybe the character him or herself is a doppelganger, too, but they don’t know it! Terror doesn't build over time like Dread does, although it can be where Dread eventually leads. The character dealing with doppelgangers might’ve experienced multiple hints that something strange was going on, and once the duplicates are revealed, suddenly all those hints fall into place and our hero knows what they mean. Readers may have been in the dark, too, and experience the revelation at the same time as the character, or they might be several steps ahead of our hero, and when he or she discovers the truth, the readers shout, "I knew it!" Characters can experience Terror is smaller ways. If a character living in a zombie apocalypse scenario discovers that he or she has been bitten, they realize instantly what it means for them and potentially for any companions they have. They will either become a zombie and seek to kill and/or infect humans, or they will have to commit suicide or ask someone else to kill them. (Or —like a lot of characters in zombie films do-try to deny what's happened until they turn into a zombie and try to eat their friends.) To effectively write a Terror-focused scene, you need to show Terror through a close identification with one character’s point of view, letting readers experience the awful realization (whatever it may be) with them.

Horror. 

Horror is an immediate reaction to a threat—disbelief, denial, turning away. There's nothing deep about this emotion. No intellectual reaction. No slow build. A werewolf jumps out of a shadow-filled alley right in front of you, fangs bared and claws raised. You don't stop to think Will you look at that: a werewolf! I guess supernatural creatures—and by implication all manner of supernatural entities and forces—are real. I suppose I don't know as much about what constitutes reality as I thought I did. You learn something new every day. If a werewolf jumps out in front of you, you wouldn't have time to process what you were seeing. All you would know is that some big scary animal thing is confronting you, and it looks like it’s going to attack any second. You wouldn't recognize it as a werewolf. As far as you know, werewolves don't exist. You would have only seconds to react. Maybe you'd be too stunned to move. Maybe you’d turn and try to flee. Maybe you'd tell yourself that what you were seeing was a hallucination. (No matter what you'd do, you’d most likely end up as the werewolf ’s dinner, though.) Horror happens in the moment. If somehow you escaped the werewolf, that one experience of Horror would be over. If you encounter the werewolf again—or worse, an entire pack of the monsters—you’d experience another episode of Horror, this one perhaps stronger than the last. Horror works well for any scary story, but it's especially effective for fast-moving tales where characters don't have time to sit around pondering what the weird stuff they're encountering means from a philosophical viewpoint. It's also good for stories where the threat makes periodic contact with characters, each time becoming worse—more powerful, more threatening, more frightening, broader in scope and implication. Poltergeist is a good example of this kind of progression. Heredity is a more recent one.

Shock. 

Writers whose prime influences are horror films instead of written fiction often employ shock in their stories, many times relying on it almost exclusively. Shock is a surprise, an adrenaline rush. When it comes to horror fiction, Shock works better on film than it does on the page—at least in terms of having an impact on the audience. If you're watching a horror movie and a vampire lunges out of the darkness to attack a character, you get to see it happen in real time. There will be color, motion, sound, and maybe music to at first set the mood and then startle you. (The shrieking violins in Psycho are the best example of Shock music in cinema.) Plus, there's the vampire makeup on the actor, and the performance of both actors—the one playing the vampire and the one playing the victim. Maybe the vampire hisses, maybe the victim screams. And the director and cinematographer can use camera angles and lighting to create the overall desired effect. And the audience experiences all of this more or less simultaneously, in the space of a few seconds. But writers must work one word at a time, putting them in sequence to create units of meaning. We can't replicate the effect of movie-type Shock on the page. And if we try, we look stupid. Bonnie was walking down the street when a vampire lunged at her from the shadows and she screamed. That’s nothing but a bloodless summary of action. Lifeless and dull. One way that writers can shock readers is with a surprising revelation that changes how they view the entire story. Thrillers like Gillian Flynn's Gone Girl employ this technique as do films like The Sixth Sense and The Usual Suspects. I think twists like this are more effective when they happen before the climax of a story, when we aren’t expecting them. A lot of indie thriller authors on Amazon add descriptive subtitles to their book titles to create something like this: Blood on the Ice: A Gripping Thriller With a Shocking Twist You'll Never See Coming! Uh, dude, of course I’m going to see the twist coming. You just told me about it! The Crying Game is a film where the twist occurs in the middle and changes the direction of the story as well as the relationship between the two main characters. If you're unfamiliar with it, don't read about it online and spoil the surprise for yourself. Find a copy and watch it and you'll see what I mean. You can show how Shock affects your characters, of course—and you should. Some writers use extreme content in an attempt to shock readers, but if readers come to your work because they like extreme content, they're not going to be shocked. They're more likely to read a scene of depravity, chuckle, shake their head, and say, “Man, that is sick!" And if readers aren't used to extreme content, they'll most likely feel the last emotion on our list.

Disgust. 

Disgust is a queasy, visceral reaction. Stephen Kings calls this the “gross-out," and that's as good a term as any. This emotion is the easiest of the five to evoke, and it's usually presented in a plain writing style to deliver a disgusting image to readers as clearly and quickly as possible. 

Compare this: 

Bob felt his mouth—lips, teeth, tongue, the orifice though which he shrieked his first infant's cry, with which he suckled at his mother's breast, through which he breathed, gasped, laughed, sighed, and spoke who knew how many thousands, perhaps millions of words, most of them ordinary and banal but, he likes to think, maybe at least some of them profound and insightful, witty if nothing else, the mouth that first kissed Alexandra after their date their freshman year at Idaho State, that had asked her to marry him eight months later, that had kissed the tender flesh of his own infant daughter’s forehead a decade later, after her squalling, squirming entrance into this world—get struck by a sledgehammer. 

To this: 

Bob saw the sledgehammer coming at him, too fast to avoid. Hard, heavy metal slammed into the lower half of his face, pulping lips, shattering teeth, pulverizing his jaw. Blood sprayed the air as white light exploded behind his eyes, and he fell backward, knocked off balance by the devastating blow. His head smacked the concrete floor as he hit, sending afresh wave of pain through his skull, and several of his broken teeth slid to the back of his ravaged mouth, swept there by thick, hot blood. He swallowed reflexively, the teeth lodging in his throat, making it impossible for him to breathe, and he began choking. The second example is far more effective than the first (even if it won't win me another Bram Stoker Award). The prose focuses on Bob experiencing the damage to his body and describes the nasty physical details of his injuries—details I purposefully chose to evoke a queasy reaction. (How did you like the swallowing teeth bit? Gross, huh?) There's an art to writing Disgust, of course, just as there's an art to writing anything. The plainer and more focused the prose—and the more you stay in the moment—the more effective it will be. it's really easy to do poorly, though, and page after page of Disgust-focused scenes can quickly turn off readers or, if they keep reading, make them numb to what happens next. If you want your readers to feel the full force of Disgust, you need to give them a break once in a while. Give them a chance to recover from the last metaphorical blow they took before you hit them again. As I said at the outset of this chapter, all five emotional states have their place in horror fiction. You might enjoy some more than others, might gravitate toward using one more often in your own work. And you might switch it up from one story to another. You can think of the five emotions as tools to use whenever you need them, or as seasoning to use in whatever proportions you think are best when cooking. If you want an example of a work that uses all five emotions—Dread, Terror, Horror, Shock, and Disgust— and mixes them effectively, look no further John Carpenter’s The Thing. The movie fires on all horror cylinders. It's a master class in what a creator working at the height of his powers can do when he uses all the tools at his disposal and uses them better than anyone else.

EXERCISES

1. 

Take a scene you've already written or come up with a new one for this exercise. Write it five different ways, focusing on Dread, Terror, Horror, Shock, and Disgust in turn. Which version do you think is the most effective? Which emotional state felt most comfortable or natural for you to write?

2. 

Take those five scenes and merge them into one that combines the five emotions. How did it turn out? Is it more effective than the separate scenes? Why or why not?

3. 

If you think you're stronger at using some of these emotional states in your writing and weaker using others, consider concentrating on the ones you’re weaker at to get better at them. Choose one you’re weaker at—say Dread, for example—and write a whole story focusing primarily on using that emotional state. Do the same for any other emotion you'd like to become more skilled at using.

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Yvette Tan, award-winning author of Waking the Dead

1. 

A good horror story elicits dread from its audience. This can happen in different ways. For example, it can be instantaneous, like when a reader gets scared while reading, or it can be subtle (and insidious), as with a story that gnaws at the imagination at the most inconvenient places long after the book is put down. A good horror story need not be overtly characterized as “horror.” The beautiful thing about horror that a lot more people need to realize is that it’s not a genre, but an emotion. There is room for horror no matter what you are writing. Horror can be felt regardless of what shelf in the bookstore your book appears in. It's the dread factor that's important. Everything else is malleable.

2. 

I believe that good horror writing uses the same rules as good fiction writing: proper character development, a concrete setting, solid world building, beautiful language, and so on. The difference is that a horror story is a well-told story that elicits dread but other than that, it should still follow the rules of good writing.

Michael Arnzen, award-winning author of Grave Markings

1.

Disturbing fiction and film is the best because it reminds me of my frailties and limits. Good horror, for me, is the kind that suddenly shocks or slowly creeps up on you in a way that makes you realize everything you took for granted was wrong or misinformed. It's like a punch you didn't see coming, but which you're THANKFUL FOR afterward, because it opened up your eyes somehow in the process . . . even if it leaves a big ugly bruise.

2.

Everyone says “read everything” and that's good advice, because research only helps and the more you read the more you'll know what kind of expectations your audience has (since they might have read more or different books than you). But maybe it's better to suggest you “study everything," too. Map out the plots of the books you like into an outline; underline the lines that blew you away with their prose; mark up the margins of the book or rewind the movie and watch the scene again with the audio commentary on. Part of that is talking with people—avid fans and other writers, too—about these horror texts. School can help in that regard, but even just participating in a fan forum online or attending a convention counts. Start thinking like a professional person who constructs these haunted houses of the mind, study the craft and appreciate the structure of horror, and it'll come more naturally to you when you build them yourself from scratch. 

Simon Clark, award-winning author of the Vampyrrhic novels

1.

Good horror for me is when the story triggers two opposite emotions: repulsion and attraction. If someone reading my story thinks to themselves, “This is terrifying but I'm fascinated, too," then I know I'm doing my job right. Also good horror doesn't have to be outrageously gross or bloody or violent; in fact, if horror ventures too much into gross-out territory it can become weaker. Personally, I also like horror that can tease back the veil of reality and allows us to glimpse deeper and grander and more extraordinary realities beyond this one: that's when we can encounter the fear of the unknown, which is, perhaps, the most compelling horror of all.

2. 

This answer could easily become book length in its own right, but my advice would be to think about what scares you; try and write from the heart and not the brain, by that I mean try and look deep into yourself and find those fundamental emotions that are common to us all, such as asking ourselves: If someone we love is in danger, how would we react? What emotions and thoughts would such a situation evoke? If you have a frightening dream, write it down—you could have struck gold! Try setting a horror story in your own home, or school or workplace—often that imbues the story with a greater sense of reality; that's when your monsters really come alive.

Yvonne Navarro, author of After Age

1. 

My personal opinion is that good horror happens when the story offers you options and makes your imagination step in and decide what’s next. It's so much more fun when you face that locked door in the dark and have no idea what’s behind it. Maybe you've heard a sound but you've never seen what’s scratching at it. And, of course, the lock will never hold.

2. 

My general advice for writing has always been to read your work aloud, and that still goes for writing horror. For horror, though, I'd add that if you've done a good job, you should be making yourself shiver, scrunch up your shoulders, and even think, “Oh, wow. Now that’s creepy.

CHAPTER NINE

THE HORROR HERO’S JOURNEY

The Hero’s Journey is a common story pattern that appears in myth and legend throughout history. So common, in fact, that most Hollywood films are based on the structure: a hero goes on an adventure—which may entail a physical journey, along with a mental, emotional, or spiritual one—experiences a crisis point, makes an important choice, wins a victory, and then returns home profoundly changed. This is a simple overview. The overall pattern is more complex, and if you'd like to read about the Hero's Journey in its entirety, hit up our good friend the Internet. One day I was thinking about the Hero's Journey and I wondered if it applied to horror fiction. It seemed a pattern that worked well with other genres—fantasy, science fiction, western, mystery, thriller, romance-but it didn't seem to lend itself well to horror. Characters in horror stories tend to be more reactive than active. They don't hear a call to action, answer the call, and set out to right wrongs or go on quests. They were going along just fine with their lives until a Bad Thing intruded into their world, forcing them to react. So if the Hero's Journey didn't lend itself well to horror, I asked myself what sort of narrative structure does? After some thought, I came up with not one but eight different story patterns for horror (and I'm sure there are more). I couldn't label them a hero's journey because characters in horror usually aren't heroic types. They're regular people thrust into very bizarre and deadly circumstances. So I decided to use the phrase Poor Bastard, as in, “Look what happened to that poor bastard.” The phrase seemed to fit the concept of a character to whom something bad happens. Then I asked myself what sort of “adventure” does that Poor Bastard go on? I decided that since he or she ends up in an awful place—literally or metaphorically—I’d call the “adventure” a Descent into Hell. When I put it all together, I got the Poor Bastard's Descent into Hell, which seemed to me to be an apt description of a horror story's basic pattern. The more I thought about this basic pattern, the more I realized there were eight variations based on how the Poor Bastard's story turned out. So Poor Bastard = Normal Person (not a hero), and Descent into Hell = a situation that steadily and nightmarishly worsens. “Hell" can be physical, spiritual, mental, emotional, internal, external, or any combination. So let's follow that poor bastard into Hell.

The Poor Bastard Escapes Hell. 

In this pattern, the Poor Bastard manages to survive the Bad Thing that happens to him or her. In Bradbury’s Something Wicked This Way Comes, the characters escape Mr. Dark and the carnival folk who then move on to plague another town. Just as in the Hero’s Journey, these characters are battle weary and exhausted at the end, but they stood up to evil and survived. A lot of Stephen King's novels fit into this pattern. Salem’s Lot, The Shining, The Stand . . . It's satisfying for readers and is equivalent to romances H-E-A: Happily Ever After. If the characters an audience reads about can survive such a horrible experience, then maybe they can survive the trials and tribulations of their lives as well.

The Poor Bastard Conquers Hell. 

In this variation, characters manage to destroy the Bad Thing, whatever it is, so it can never hurt anyone else ever again. The fiendish Count is killed in Dracula. The shark in jaws gets blown up. The Wolf Man is killed with a silver bullet. This pattern probably comes the closest to the actual Hero’s Journey, although there may be more casualties along the way, and the “heroes” probably don't feel the same sort of emotional high from their triumph because of what it cost them to win. Audiences love this pattern for the same reason they love the Hero’s Journey, but it always seems to ring a bit false to me, especially in prose. It feels more like an adventure than horror—especially if the characters don't seem all that affected by what they've gone through. James Gunn's Slither is a good example of The Poor Bastard Conquers Hell pattern that feels more like an adventure overall, although since the horror is laced with comedy in that film, the adventure-style ending works for me. Many times the characters’ victory over the Bad Thing is only temporary in the Poor Bastard Conquers Hell pattern, and it will return, if not to plague the hero, then someone else. The Ring ends like this. You might escape Samara, but only by passing her curse on to another. This type of ending is more realistic in that we continually strive against Bad Things in real life—injury, illness, despair, personal and professional failures, death—and once we deal with one Bad Thing, another appears. This sets the Poor Bastard Conquers Hell apart from the Hero’s journey. One way or another, the Bad Thing may live on.

The Poor Bastard Is Eternally Damned. 

In this pattern, the Poor Bastard is conquered by the Bad Thing. This could mean the character dies, survives without destroying the Bad Thing, or falls under the power of the Bad Thing and is claimed by it. The move Krampus ends like this, as does The Blair Witch Project and "The Lottery.“ The Poor Bastard may sacrifice him or herself to save others, thereby winning a costly victory. Or the Poor Bastard may simply fail and be claimed by the darkness forevermore. In the Mouth of Madness is a good example of this sort of ending. For readers, it has the benefit of giving them one last jolt of horror before the story ends. In a sense, this is a happy ending for a horror audience—or perhaps a satisfying ending would be a better way to put it. The audience showed up for a horror story, not a children's fairy tale, so a dark ending suits them just fine.

The Poor Bastard Escapes with Severe Wounds and Scars. 

The Poor Bastard survives—maybe even conquers the Bad Thing—but at a high price. They are severely wounded themselves, physically, mentally, or spiritually, or they had to suffer devastating losses along the way. Perhaps the deaths of friends or family. Or perhaps friends and family were claimed by the Bad Thing and had to be put down—or they remain damned. The Poor Bastard in this story pattern may wish he or she hadn’t survived, which I suppose makes this overlap with the Poor Bastard Is Eternally Damned pattern. Stephen King's The Dark Half is a good example of this, and in his novel Doctor Sleep, we see the toll surviving the events at the Overlook Hotel has taken on an adult Danny Torrance. If the Poor Bastard Conquers Hell is like a soldier returning victorious from a battle, this pattern is the soldier returning physically disabled and with PTSD. This always strikes me as one of the more realistic patterns in horror, regardless of whether the Bad Thing is realistic itself or supernatural in nature. What normal person could go up against a truly Bad Thing and come out unscathed? 

The Poor Bastard Is Transformed by Hell. 

This is similar to the last pattern, but the change in the character is deeper, more profound. In horror, there’s often the cliche of a character who's dealt previously with the Bad Thing and been so traumatized by it they're locked up in a mental hospital—where the current hero can conveniently find them and ask questions about the Bad Thing and how to fight it. Sometimes these characters have been driven completely insane by their encounter with the Bad Thing. Other times, the experience was too much for them and they isolate themselves from others and want nothing to do with the Bad Thing until they are forced to contend with it once more. Or they refuse to help the current hero, but show up at the climax because they couldn't in good conscience stay away. The character may have been profoundly altered by their encounter with the Bad Thing. Maybe they can no longer sleep. Maybe they’re blind or can’t speak. Maybe they suffer terrible nightmares whenever they do sleep. This overlaps the Severe Wounds and Scars of the previous pattern, but the wounds are specific and constitute a permanent change for the character.

The Poor Bastard Carries Hell with Him. 

The Poor Bastard may have conquered the Bad Thing, merely survived it, or was conquered by it. Whatever the outcome, the Poor Bastard forever after carries a small portion of Hell with them. Maybe the character defeated a homicidal ghost, but now the ghost dwells within them and is always whispering terrible things in the character's mind. Maybe the character is cursed somehow, and he or she must learn to live with it. Maybe the character sees hallucinations of the Bad Thing afterward, and may always see them—like Paul Sheldon at the end of Misery. Another variation on Severe Wounds and Scars, but now the Bad Thing, or at least part of it, exists within the Poor Bastard.

The Poor Bastard Drags Others to Hell or Brings Hell to Them. 

Great example: the ending of the film version of Clive Barker’s Midnight Meat Train. The Poor Bastard in this story conquers a servant of darkness only to end up replacing him. In this pattern, such an outcome is usually implied by the ending. We don't get an entirely new story in which we witness the Poor Bastard now serving the Bad Thing. But it’s made clear that’s exactly what's going to happen. A similar ending occurs in Roman Polanski‘s The Fearless Vampire Killers, where the heroes defeat a group of vampires only to carry the contagion with them as they head home. This type of ending can feel false if it's forced. If the Poor Bastard fought the Bad Thing‘s influence for so long, why does he or she give in to it in the end? Such a drastic reversal needs to be set up well and clearly foreshadowed. I enjoy endings like this. It gives the story a twist at the end and the Bad Thing wins. It's horror’s version of a tragic ending. Darkness has not only triumphed—it‘s claimed the hero as its own.

The Poor Bastard Becomes the Devil. 

This is similar to a couple other patterns on this list, but instead of merely being conquered by the Bad Thing, the main character becomes the Bad Thing, joining completely with it or taking over from it. A hero kills the master vampire only to be bitten and end up taking the master vampire’s place. A descendant of Doctor Frankenstein learns his ancestors secrets and decides to repeat his experiments, intending not to make the same mistakes his ancestor did. But instead of creating a perfect, godlike being, he ends up making another damned monster that goes on a rampage. This could be the way the hero beats the Bad Thing—by usurping its power—but the hero is forever after tainted by Darkness, like Tom Cruise’s character in the 2017 version of The Mummy. Meet the new boss, same as the old boss—or worse. Will Graham in the Hannibal TV series struggles with this. His highly empathetic imagination allows him to get into the mindset of a serial killer, but doing so damages him, contaminates him. In his case, Becoming the Devil isn't a story outcome that occurs but rather one Graham fights to avoid. So what practical use does awareness of these eight story outcomes have for you as a writer? They can help you avoid ending each of your stories the same basic way every time by exposing you to different potential outcomes. You might find one outcome—one perhaps that you've never considered before—suits you more than the others, so you'll use it from now on. The outcomes are plotting tools. You can decide that you want to write a story about a Poor Bastard Who Carries Hell with Him (or Her) and then plot a story that gets you to that outcome in the end. Or you could take one of these outcomes and use it as the beginning of a story Your main character symbolically becomes the devil. Now what? However you use the eight variations, I hope you’ll enjoy the trip—and that once your story is published, we will, too.

EXERCISES

1. 

Go over the list of story outcomes. Is there one you like most as a reader or writer? If so, what about it appeals to you? Pre-write on this for ten minutes and see what insights you might gain that will help you strengthen your stories.

2. 

Combine two or three of the story outcomes in a single story and write it (or at least outline it). I-low did using more than one outcome work for you? You can try this exercise with any combination of two or more story outcomes and see which combinations appeal to you and are most effective.

3. 

The next time you read a horror novel or watch a horror movie, try to identify which story outcome is used. Ask yourself if this was the best choice or if you think the writer should’ve tried a different one. Why or why not? Can you think of a better outcome—or combination of outcomes—to end the story? List them.

VOICES FROM THE Shadows

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Philip Pracassi, award-winning screenwriter and author of Behold the Void

1. 

For me, an effective horror story has to be surprising. Either in the way it's told, an unforeseen plot direction, a particularly well-constructed sequence of events, or simply something I've never read before. The more unique the story is, the more “voice” it has, the more I find myself engrossed in it, and usually wanting more.

2. 

Two bits of advice, and they sound conflicting but they’re not: First, be yourself. Have a voice. Make your writing something readers can only get from one source. And second, read read read. The more voices you read, the stronger your own voice will become. Writers need to see all the possibilities of what can be done with language and structure so they can better define and refine their own. There’s no better classroom for a writer than a stack of books.

Becky Siegal Spratford, author of The Readers' Advisory Guide to Horror

1. 

A good horror book needs to scare the reader, I mean really scare, hit you in your gut so you can feel it. Sounds easy, right? Except, what scares each reader can and will be completely different from person to person. So good horror comes from authors really connecting with what truly terrifies them, embracing it, and then being able to replay it on the page, in prose that takes that fear from inside themselves and allows it to live, in all its horrifying glory, on the page. 

2.

Authenticity is key. Authentically share the fear and it will connect with others. Authenticity is the best advice. Don’t try to write about what you think will scare others. Write about what truly terrifies you. Share that emotion. Horror is a genre that is reliant upon soliciting an emotional response from the reader. If you are not beginning from a place of true fear, disgust, dread, or terror with yourself, you will not be able to create a horror story that will connect with others.

John Shirley, award-winning co-author of The Dying Machine

1.

For the most part, it's about what's good for readers. As in, "Was it good for you?" Good for some people isn't always good for others. Some people are fetishistic, in a sense, as readers, about particular tropes. Perhaps they're very into vampires, or possession stories, or ghost tales, or serial killers—some favorite subgenre. Usually those readers look for effectiveness. Did the story deliver? Did it deliver the particular thrill I'm looking for—e.g., erotically charged vampire horror, or a new twist on the “nanny in terrible danger” story? For this kind of reader—maybe a majority of readers—the writing has to be pretty good but not necessarily superior. It just needs to be effective. So the writer has to either have an instinctive feel for the trope or has to have researched—mostly through deep, attentive reading in the subgenre—what delivers. The writer should not be lazy. They should work to understand how to make the reader care about the protagonist; their writing should provide the right set-up, one that's just in-depth enough without dragging on; they should develop a feel for good pacing, and for descriptive cues that may hint, may foreshadow, the horror or threat coming, without being corny about it. Genre readers truly appreciate a fresh twist to formula. (Trying to bring originality to a worn horror or dark crime subgenre is something I do fairly obsessively, and sometimes I go too far into “different” for many readers!) Insight into people, verisimilitude without being too detailed, is also appreciated by readers. (“That’s just like my weird uncle . . ." or whomever.) Then there's horror/dark fantasy/suspense that rises to a higher level of literature. Its writers read widely and deeply, and that has helped, but they also have an innate talent for writing sentences well. They “hear the music" in prose, as Harlan Ellison would say. Their pacing is inborn. They know instinctively how to titillate a reader’s unconscious fears. They have a deeper, quite natural understanding of psychology. They know what small details to include that will make us believe in a scene. The colors of the subconscious mind are part of their palette. They have something valid and resonant to say about the human condition. Algernon Blackwood at his best, Poe, Machen, Shirley Jackson—these writers come to mind. The best of Harlan Ellison. The best stories in Barker’s Books of Blood. The best of Richard Matheson and Richard Christian Matheson. The horror and dark fantasy of Fritz Leiber. 

2.

Read an admired work more than once; second time read it as a writer. Stop and deeply inspect a sentence, a paragraph, a scene. “Interrogate the writing" as William Gibson said to me once. Ask yourself how an effect happened, both in context and in a discrete passage. Think of the tale’s structure as a whole. How did its narrative arc come together? Where was the climax? How was it paced? What "colors," what moods are evoked and how? Does it have an overall flavor? When did you feel an emotional connection, in reading it, and why?

Alma Katsu, author of The Deep

1.

I love reading horror, so much more than watching horror in movies or TV, probably because writing makes a story so much more intimate, like a whisper in your ear. Intimacy makes for good horror, and you can’t fake intimacy. In writing, I mean. 

2.

For horror to be effective, it has to feel real to the reader. That means it has to feel real to the writer. You have to scare or thrill yourself first, before you can do that to your readers. That’s where intimacy comes in again: you're revealing something very personal about yourself to others. You’re showing where you're vulnerable: this scares me. You're baring yourself to strangers but nothing less will do. Readers will know if you're going through the motions. It won’t move them.

CHAPTER TEN

DOWN TO THE BONE

Allow me to refer once again to a couple points I made in previous chapters (assuming you're reading the chapters in order and not skipping around like a crazy person).

- Horror stories aren’t about monsters; they're about people.

- Horror stories are reaction stories.

- Horror is an emotion.

Taken together, these three points tell us that in order to create good horror, we need to focus on our characters’ experiences. What they think and feel—emotionally as well as physically. Or, to add another point to the above list:

- Horror happens inside characters’ heads.

Even if characters are reacting to some external threat, the reactions are internal, and it's these reactions that drive good horror fiction. This means that, in a sense, all horror—even the monsters-chomping-victims variety—is psychological horror. So in order to write effective horror fiction, you need to write with a close attachment to a specific character’s point of view. Your fiction needs to be immersive. Not sure what I'm talking about? Maybe an example will help.

Example of Distant/Non-Immersive Point of View: 

There was a monster outside the front door. Bob opened the door and the monster ate him.

Example of Immersive Point of View: 

Bob had his hand on the knob, was just about to turn it, open the door, and walk outside to check the mail, when he felt the metal vibrate beneath his flesh. Not much, just a little. But it made him think that someone on the other side had put their hand on the outside knob, making it jiggle the tiniest bit. And was the metal starting to feel colder, as if a silent arctic wind caressed the knob outside? It was a ridiculous thought, but he removed his hand from the knob all the same and, without realizing it, took two steps backward. In the second, much—improved example, we are given access to what's happening in Bob's head as he debates whether or not to open the door. We know what actions he takes in the physical world, we know what he thinks and feels, both emotionally and physically. We are inside Bob’s head, living this experience with him. We’re no longer detached observers viewing Bob's actions from a great distance. We're right there in the thick of it with him. Horror happens inside a character, and if we're inside Bob’s head with him, we’ll experience his horror as if it was our own. (Within reason, of course. Remember the Kids in the Hall sketch “Boo!") This kind of immersion is one of the greatest strengths written fiction has. No method of visual storytelling—movies, TV shows, plays, video-games—can put readers into characters’ heads like immersive fiction. Still, no matter how much they may read, most writers have experienced far more visual storytelling than they have written material. Visual media focuses on specific techniques to tell stories—sound, movement, color, light, shadow . . . Most beginning writers use only sound and movement in their fiction. Part of this is because that's what visual media rely on the most. But a deeper reason is because sight and hearing are humans’ strongest senses. With them, we can gather information from a great distance, which is why we rely on them so heavily. Our other senses—taste, touch, and smell—are so weak our bodies have to be in physical contact with or close proximity to whatever it is we're trying to perceive for them to be effective. In visual media, we also experience the story from outside the characters. In creative writing classes, I ask students whose point of view is dominant in a film. Sometimes they’ll say the main character or actor, sometimes the director. Then I ask them whose consciousness the story is filtered through. At this point, someone usually gives the correct answer: the audience's consciousness.
To put it another way, think of fiction like music. Visual media is like sitting in the audience and listening to musicians perform. Immersive fiction is like being a musician and playing the music yourself. I always say that writers are like composers. We create a piece of music then hand it to the musician (reader) to play using their instrument (their imagination). Writers give readers the tools to tell themselves a story. Watching visual media is passive. Reading fiction is interactive. In order to take full advantage of fiction's interactivity, you need to . . . anyone? Correct. You need to write with an immersive point of view. How immersive is immersive? There are varying degrees of immersion, but if you hope to reach a wide audience, I'd suggest not going too deep. In James Joyce's Ulysses and Finnegan's Wake, he attempted to recreate the experience of consciousness on the page, and as a result, he created what is probably the most difficult fiction to read and understand in the entire history of our species. I don't know how many people who attempt to tackle these novels manage to make it all the way through, but I'm certain those who do can never fully understand everything that Joyce put into those books, even with repeated readings and intensive study. If you've never read Joyce's novels Ulysses or Finnegan's Wake (I've only read portions of each), hit the Internet, look up some passages, and you'll see what I mean. (A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is much more a straightforward narrative, as are the stories in Dubliners, and thus, far easier to read.) Back in Chapter Eight, I wrote a very immersive bad example of how to portray Disgust. I did it to make a point in what I hope was a fun way, but it also shows how if you get too immersive, if you sink too deeply into a character's consciousness, no one can tell what the hell is going on outside the character's head. If you have literary aspirations and are more interested in the art you create than the size of your audience, get as immersive as you want. Experiment with different degrees of immersion in different stories or even with the same story. My Shirley Jackson Award-nominated story “How to Be a Horror Writer” is written as a deeply immersive piece.
Okay, I think we've defined immersion well enough. Let's talk about some ways to write effectively with an immersive point of view. Don't write as if you're an emotionless camera recording the scene from a distance. Instead, think of a camera that's mounted on your character's shoulder and attached to his or her brain. This magical camera gives readers access not only to sight and sound, but to thoughts, emotions, memory connections, psychological reactions, and physical sensations. Having access to all this information allows readers to become more deeply involved in your story. Relate backstory in memory. Instead of merely summarizing backstory elements, consider dramatizing them as flashbacks. These can be short flashes of dramatized memory—only a few sentences, perhaps written in italics—that occur in the middle of present-time action. For example: Maddy reached out to touch the thin layer of frost on the window. Her skin came in contact with the cold—icy wind tearing at her flesh, roaring in her ears, snatching her breath away, making her eyes water and ache. She gasped and jerked her hand away as if she’d been burned.

Dramatized memories can be longer, of course, and they can be full-fledged scenes or even complete chapters blended with present-time action. Make sure the memories you dramatize this way are important ones, though—and you don’t have to tell your readers everything with dramatized backstory. You can present such scenes as little puzzle pieces to enhance the story's feeling of mystery and suspense. First Person, Second Person, Third Person—all can be immersive. First person point of view might seem to be the best choice for writing immersive fiction. After all, a narrator is telling someone their story, either verbally or through writing. The narrator knows exactly what he or she was thinking and feeling as the events of the story took place, and he or she can choose to reveal all of these details during the course of the narration. Right? Not necessarily. First person narrators in fiction have perfect memories—far better than most human beings have. In fiction, a ninety-year-old narrator can remember what she had for breakfast on the morning of her second birthday. I can't remember what I had for dinner yesterday, and I think it's fair to say most of us have spotty, imperfect memories. Readers become used to first-person narrators, so they rarely question why their memories are so damned good. (Pro-tip: If you want your first-person narration to seem more realistic, have your first-person narrator forget a few minor details here and there: I can't remember if it was a Wednesday or a Thursday, but I remember it was raining.) But there are other problems with first-person narrators. Even if they do remember everything in exquisite detail, how many people share their deepest, most personal thoughts and feelings when they relate events they’ve lived through? Most people provide summaries of what happened, maybe going into more specific detail here and there during the most exciting parts, but not sharing anything too private or intimate. And of course, first-person narrators can be unreliable. They can be deluded, crazy, deceptive, or mistaken about certain aspects of the story. And you've got the aspect of who is the narrator telling the story to and why? And how much time has elapsed since the narrator lived the story and the present time when he or she is telling it? That means you have two versions of the same person to deal with: the present version telling the story and the past version living it. And since the narrator has already lived the story, he or she knows how it turned out. Why the hell does he or she wait so long to let us know what the climax of the story is? Most first-person mystery stories should begin something like this: Let me tell you the story of howl discovered Alexa Montgomery murdered Silos Erringtan. And because the narrator knows everything that happened, there's no reason for him or her to tell the story to us in chronological order. They could jump around in time all they wanted. So because of all these issues —which, admittedly, most readers don’t think about—it can be difficult to get effectively immersive in first person. Even my favorite Matheson story “Born of Man and Woman" (which I referenced earlier in the book) has problems with first-person narration. The mutant girl has been isolated in the basement since she was an infant. She has somehow learned to write, although in short, broken sentences filled with simple but misspelled words. How did she learn to write? How did she learn the damn alphabet in the first place? What is she using to write? Who is she writing to? How would she even have any concept of writing to another person? Stephen King‘s Delores Claiborne is an excellent first-person narrative in which practical questions of having a first-person narrator are answered. The narrator is talking to police officers who she taught in school when they were little. She's confessing to a murder she did years ago to prove she didn't do the present-day murder they've arrested her for now. As the cops’ former teacher, she's able to boss them into shutting up and listening to her tell her story her way, all the way through, without interrupting her (for the most part).
Second person—You do this, you do that—can seem awkward to readers unaccustomed to it. Some nameless narrator (actually, you, the author) tells the reader who he or she is and what he or she is doing moment by moment. Because the author supplies the details—and in present tense—there's no question how the character knows this information. Readers eventually acclimate to this point of view (although some people never get used to it) and as long as the author remains in one specific character’s head (for an entire story, an entire novel, or for an entire chapter or scene within a chapter) all is well. (We'll discuss more about second-person narratives in Chapter Sixteen: “A Matter of Style.") Third-person narration can be equally as immersive as first and second. As long as you remember to stay in one character's head for one complete unit (again, an entire story, an entire novel, or for an entire chapter or scene within a chapter) it will work fine. Even though third-person narration is almost always written in past tense, it feels to readers as if the story events are occurring right now, and they don't question the amount of detail that's filtered through the third-person character's consciousness. When it comes to choosing a type of narration for your stories, go with whichever allows you to write the most effective, immersive fiction. Go with whichever seems to make the words flow fastest. And if you can't decide, pick one, start writing, and if you don't think it's working, switch to another and give that one a try. Write vivid scenes. Presenting readers vivid details filtered through the consciousness of a specific viewpoint will give those details much greater impact—a vital effect in horror fiction. In fact, you could make a good argument that vivid details are what horror fiction is. I can write a description of an abandoned warehouse in a rundown area of a dying city without ever mentioning a character is present to perceive those details. Look at Lovecraft’s characters. They're little more than colorless ciphers through whom Lovecraft presents the details of his stories. You can swap out the characters, place them into different tales, and nothing would change about the stories. The details would have the same effect. To creative vivid fiction, present sensory detail. I mentioned the five senses earlier in this chapter, and discussed why humans rely on sight and sound so much. Now I’ll let you in on a secret. Our weakest senses—smelling, taste, and touch—paradoxically have a much greater impact on us. The reason for this is simple: intimacy. As I said, in order for our weaker senses to pick up information, we have to be very close to the thing we’re sensing, have to touch it (or be touched by it anywhere on our bodies), or put it into our bodies to taste it. Technically, when we smell, we draw in molecules of whatever it is into our bodies, too. Smell, taste, and touch are the secret weapons of anyone who wants to write vivid fiction, but they are absolutely essential for horror writers. It's hard to give you a rule for when and how often to employ a specific sense in your writing. I've heard older writers suggest that you should evoke at least three of the five senses on each page of a story, and that’s as good a guideline as any, I suppose. I think you should experiment with including sensory detail in your fiction until you come up with techniques that satisfy you and your readers, and which lead to your stories getting published. Memory connections are another type of vivid detail that works well. If a character returns as an adult to a playground they played in as a child, they will remember flashes of times they spent there, perhaps even an entire memory that is pertinent to the present-day action of the story. These memory connections not only make fiction more vivid, they give your readers deeper insight into your characters. (And if they’re creepy memory connections, so much the better!) Comparisons such as similes and metaphors also make for vivid fiction. In case you don't remember the differences between them, a simile is a comparison using like or as and a metaphor is a direct comparison. Simile: The city bus chugged and puffed down the street like a green—and-white dragon. The word like tells us very clearly that this is a comparison only. Metaphor: The green-and-white dragon chugged and puffed down the street. Without the buffer of like or as (or for that matter, not naming what the thing really is—a bus) readers can become very confused. Metaphors like this can work well in poetry and realistic, mainstream fiction. But if you're writing horror, fantasy, or science fiction, it might really be a dragon going down the street, so you need to use metaphors judiciously.
Psychological comparisons—how characters perceive one thing to be like another thing—can also tell us a lot about a character. Take a stereotypical old graveyard with faded, cracked headstones and a single, scraggly, leafless tree rising upward in their midst. The tree kind of looks like a large, thin hand with spindly, pointed claws. If Shaggy and Scooby Doo walk into the graveyard (assuming you had enough Scoobie Snacks to bribe them into going there in the first place) and they bump into the tree—Shaggy getting his shirt caught, Scoob getting his collar snagged—they would be terrified because they were already scared coming into the graveyard, and seeing what looks like a giant monster hand rising forth from the ground to grab them causes both of them to almost have a coronary. Now if Sherlock Holmes walked into that same graveyard, he likely wouldn't even notice the tree. He would be completely focused on whatever reason brought him to the graveyard, and he would allow nothing to distract him. I’m not sure if he’s even capable of being distracted. In both scenarios, the tree looks exactly the same. The only thing that's changed is the consciousness through which details are filtered. Different consciousnesses perceive the same thing in different ways. Writers can make scenes more vivid—and deepen characterization—through use of psychological comparisons.
I made up the name for this next technique. Anchor Points are when you use a blend of different details—a sense, a thought, a bit of dialogue, a memory connection, an emotion—to anchor the scene in reality for the reader. We perceive reality as a constant and ever-shifting input of data—and as responses to that data. We're always sifting through this mass of data to determine what is and what isn't important enough to pay attention to at any given moment. Anchor Points allow you to simulate this experience for your reader (and the data is, as always, filtered through the consciousness of a specific viewpoint character). Here's an example from one of my stories called “A Touch of Madness,” originally published in The Pulp Horror Book of Phobias by Lycan Valley Press. Kristina Lawson sat at a corner table in a small cafe, coffee sitting in front of her, gloved hands tucked beneath her legs. Folk-pop music played over the cafe‘s sound system in a vain attempt to give the place a relaxing atmosphere, but it was filled with so many people—ordering at the counter, sitting and talking to one another, working behind the counter and operating various whirring, whooshing, or grinding machines—and the air thrummed with tension. She glanced around at the other customers. A couple sitting at a table, each involved in whatever was displayed on their phone screens instead of looking at each other. A father sitting with his twin daughters—who were five at the most and dressed in superhero outfits complete with capes, one green, one red—sipping juice boxes while their dad drank his coffee. A pair of middle-aged women in blue medical smocks talking over coffee and pastries after a long hospital shift. And a dozen more, including the staff behind the counter. All of them appeared completely normal. Completely sane. But she knew better than most that appearances didn't mean shit. Anything could be happening behind their eyes, their thoughts a chaotic maelstrom of wild imperceptions and barely restrained homicidal impulses. Any one of them could be on the verge of succumbing to the lunacy raging inside, and then all hell would break loose. Pam would've told her she was being paranoid, and maybe so. But she'd seen it happen before, and if it had happened once, it could happen again. She wasn’t sure why Pam had asked to have their session in a public place like this instead of her office. No doubt she thought there was a good reason for it, maybe some new type of therapy that she wanted to try, but Kristina wasn't comfortable around people, especially this many. She looked down on the tabletop to avoid meeting anyone’s gaze. She flexed her hands, felt them move under her legs, was reassured to know they were still protected. She made no move to touch the coffee in front of her. She didn't want it, didn't really like coffee much. She'd only bought it so she wouldn't look any stranger sitting here than she already did. This is the beginning of the story. Kristina’s therapist Pam has asked her to meet in a coffee shop this day instead of in her office. Kristina doesn’t know why, and she's nervous. She's also afraid that the people around her might start acting crazy any second. (For the anthology, authors could choose a specific phobia to write about. I chose agateophobia, the fear of insanity.) I presented a shifting array of details filtered through Kristina‘s consciousness, and since I knew she was apprehensive to begin with and was becoming more anxious as the moments passed, I selected details that someone in her emotional state would pay attention to, while at the same time using those details to begin building tension. Hopefully, everything works together to create an immersive scene that provides a good opening for the story. Some of you out there might be wondering if it's possible to write fiction without using immersive techniques and still produce an effective story. Of course it is. There’s only one real rule in writing: you have to use marks on a page to communicate information to readers. Everything else is just using different techniques to create different effects in the hope what you finally produce will please someone, somewhere (and hopefully make you a little money, too). But if you want to create fiction—especially horror fiction— that grabs readers, draws them into a story, and doesn't let them go until they reach the end, immersive techniques like the kind we've discussed in this chapter are an excellent way to do it.

EXERCISES

1. 

Write a scene with an immersive point of view using one of the following situations: a) someone is lost in a dark, sinister forest and is trying to find his or her way out; b) someone thinks he or she hears an intruder in the house in the middle of the night; c) someone feels an entity of some kind—a ghost, a demon—attempting to possess him or her.

2. 

Write the same scene three times in three different narrative styles: first person, second person, and third person, striving for immersion each time. Which person do you think worked best? Which was easiest to write? Which was the hardest?



3. 

Pick a story or novel you admire. Select a scene at random and go through it, looking at how the author uses anchor points. (You can also do this with a scene from your own fiction, if you wish.) To get even more out of this exercise, get a number of different-colored markers or highlighters. Assign a color to each type of detail. For example, a sight is red, a sound is blue, a memory connection is green, a psychological comparison is purple, and so on. Go through the text (either another author's, yours, or both) and highlight the anchor points. When you’re finished, look at the highlighted passage and squint your eyes a bit so you can't read the words, just see the colors. What you’re looking at is the overall pattern of how the author blends different types of details together. If you've highlighted both another author's scene and one of your own, compare them. Are the patterns similar? Do they vary, perhaps quite a bit? Which is more effective? The other writer’s or yours? If you think yours needs improvement, rewrite the scene, striving for a more effective blend and balance of details.

VOICES PROM THE SHADOWS

1.

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2.

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Thomas Ligotti, award-winning author of Songs of a Dead Dreamer and Grimscribe

1.

“What makes good horror” is a strange and often-posed question and everybody knows it, or at least those who have taken it as seriously as such a query demands, much like “What is life?" or “Who am I?" It's not like asking what makes good mystery, good fantasy, good science fiction, or whatever good recreational literature one enjoys. It’s more like asking “What makes good tragedy?"—a question, like many others of its type, that requires an uplifting response such as Aristotle's formula that good tragedy provides an effect of catharsis that purges us of the very fact there is such a thing as tragedy, an amelioration of the emotions of pity and terror. Good horror, therefore, must provide a reader with an escape from the reality of horror in our lives. This is the commonplace and psychosocially demanded response to the issue in question. Good horror, from a literary perspective, is reading fodder that makes you feel good about horror itself. Such is the traditionally paradoxical deflection of a question that's thrown in the face of readers who need a distraction from what is truly awful in our existence, since, from a realist perspective, there is no such thing as good horror. If you, as a writer, can make this happen for us (let us be honest) rather pitiable and to some degree terror-stricken readers, then you have written good horror. This is by no means an original analysis. To resent the necessity or usefulness of good horror is a rarer reaction among us. 

2.

Don't do it. If you can write some other kind of fiction, do that. If you cannot, then I deeply empathize with you. I'm also grateful to you and admire your dedication to a labor you probably did not ask to take on. But if you do attempt to write effective horror, your horror, which I guarantee you others will also recognize as theirs, and make this attempt quite possibly at the expense of all else in your life, you will be rewarded. 

Moncrieff, author of Those Who Came Before

1.

Good horror goes beyond the supernatural and the monster. It digs deeper, getting to the monster that lives inside us all. . . the town that sees something horrible happen, but remains silent. Neighbors who turn against one another, incited into a violent rage. Mob mentality has to be one of the scariest things out there. Or when good people stand by and do nothing. One of the biggest letdowns is when dark fiction has a great setup, and the resolution is, “It was supernatural!” That feels extremely lazy to me. Not that good novels can’t involve the supernatural, but it shouldn't be the way an author writes themselves out of a corner. The supernatural is scariest when it seems real—when it's woven into a story, not the answer for everything. 

2.

Good horror is all about character development and pacing. We have to care about your characters to be scared for them. This, sadly, is why a lot of horror books are forgettable—no time was spent on the characters, only the plot. But if readers get invested in your characters, it’s that much easier to toy with their emotions. Even better if you can get them to feel sorry for the villain(s)—that really messes with them. Pacing is key. You need quiet moments, or lighter moments—comic relief is great. But horror is not the place to have long explanations about how the sun hits the desert during a certain time of year, or how AI actually works. Unless there's something inherently eerie about either. Avoid the info dump at all costs, or risk losing your reader.

Maurice Broaddus, author of Unfadeable

1. 

Good horror is a roller-coaster of dread, from anticipation, to encountering it, to its resolution. Effective horror takes that which is sacred (family, faith, love, our sense of control, etc.) and violates it. It takes that which we fear most (Death, the unknown, evil, etc.) and torments us with them.

2. 

You are the maestro of terror. You conduct the emotions of the reader through the movement of the story like you are leading the finest of symphonies. You need to build and control the atmosphere, sustain tension, escalate dream (manipulating the reader's sense of powerlessness and apprehension), and build toward the moment of cathartic release (which has to pay off from the movements you've been composing).

Stephen Volk, award-winning screenwriter and author of Coffeemaker Blues: Collected Writings an Terror

1. 

For me, it is the story you sense under the story. The theme, and the metaphor for the theme. A ghost, for instance, can be a metaphor for grief, revenge, justice for a crime unpunished, fear of mortality, or all of the above. A vampire—well, we know it can mean different things from looking at its different incarnations through the decades. The strength and acuity of the metaphor is what gives a story emotional depth beyond the skill of the writing. At its very best, whether in words or images, it makes ours the most poetic of genres.

2.

Write from the heart and write the stories you want to read. Use your own life experience to make your characters and settings true, however implausible or ludicrous the situation they’re in. That way, your tales will be bedded in a world and authenticity that is yours and uniquely yours. Read inside and outside the genre. Watch inside and outside the genre. For horror: find out how little you can do to make it horror. (The most effective horror stories are sometimes on the edge of not being horror at all.)
For suspense: it's all about point of view. (Deciding when to release or hold back information through the plot.) For me, horror is all about the humanity, even when it’s about inhumanity. It holds up a mirror—so don't be afraid to look hard at your own reflection.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

MORE THAN MEAT

This book is focused on helping people become better writers of horror, and while much of what I have to say can be applied to any type of fiction, I don’t want to cover the basic elements of fiction in general here. You can find tons of advice on the basics in articles, books, blogs, YouTube videos . . . So while this chapter focuses on creating effective characters, it's about the special concerns of creating characters in horror fiction. Again, much of my advice might be applicable to writing any variety of fiction, but don't expect this chapter to tell you everything there is to know about creating effective characters, all right? Okay, now that I've got that disclaimer out of the way, let's get started. One of the biggest problems—if not the biggest—with characters in horror is that, as Gary A. Braunbeck once told me, they exist only to be “slurped by the glop," Of course, characters don't have to die in horror stories, and killing characters, especially central ones, at the end of a story is a cheap and cliched way of attempting to garner reader sympathy or shock readers. Killing characters can have an emotional impact, of course. George R,R. Martin has made an art of it. But it takes time for readers to get to know a character, to feel sympathetic toward them, to become invested in their well-being, to care about them. There isn’t time for this process to occur in short fiction. It can happen at longer lengths—a novella or a novel—so long as a writer is skilled at character development. But killing a character in a short story? That has no emotional impact on readers whatsoever. This doesn’t mean a short story with a character's death can never work. But there are all kinds of other ways to make a story interesting—a cool concept, really good writing . . . Besides, as I always tell people when I conduct workshops in horror writing, dying should be the least of your characters‘ problems in a horror story. Death lets a character off the hook. They can't be hurt anymore. Why would you be that nice to your characters? It’s a writer's job to make characters suffer. (More on this in Chapter Twelve: “Hurts So Good.”) There are numerous horror novels where few, if any, people die. There are no murders in King's The Shining (although there is one in the film version). No one dies in the film version of King’s story "1408." And even in horror novels where people die, it's not usually wall-to—wall carnage. It can be, of course, but death isn't necessary for a story to be horror. But death is a common event in horror. It's a way of establishing the Bad Thing in the story is really bad and that can ramp up the tension and suspense for readers because they know the heroes will eventually be forced to confront the Bad Thing and attempt to deal with it. But even characters whose main function is to die to establish the story threat as strong and deadly shouldn't be treated as disposable nobodies, colorless ciphers who barely exist beyond maybe a given name and gender. Horror writers should respect all their characters and make sure each is granted his or her dignity, even if they only have a brief time on stage. Maybe especially then. Trying to make all characters-main ones, supporting ones, walk-on parts, extras—as fully developed as possible given their roles in the story will increase readers’ emotional investment in the overall story. And when those characters die, it'll make the Bad Thing seem much worse because it's killed someone we've come to care about, even if only a little. Doing this with central characters isn't difficult, so long as you've done a decent job of characterization. But it's not quite so easy to do with supporting and minor characters. One way l try to give my characters their dignity—even if in reality the only story function they serve is to “get slurped by the glop"—is to create a mini-story for them, especially in novels. Deaths are hardly uncommon in my horror novels, and I've written three creature-feature books—monsters on the loose and eating people—and a good number of characters die in those. But instead of having my monster rip apart cardboard cutouts of people, I do my best to portray these characters as being in the middle of living their lives when a Bad Thing comes along and gets them. In The Teeth of the Sea, two recently married women are on their honeymoon at a new South American island resort when they're attacked by aquatic dinosaurs. I choose one of the couples as the viewpoint character, showed what her new marriage meant to her, and showed that while she and her wife hadn't experienced a lot of homophobia back in Chicago where they lived, they'd experienced their fair share. But at the resort, they hadn't experienced any, and it was a relief to be able to hold hands in public, touch and kiss each other, without feeling disapproving glares being directed at them.
In my novel The Forever House, a real estate agent is showing clients a house where grisly murders once took place. The agent fears this may be her last chance to sell the house. She's also stressed because her aging mother is demented and housed in an assisted-living facility, and the agent is the only family member in the area to help take care of her. And this poor working woman is one of the first people to get killed by the monsters in the story. The three women in these novels all get slurped by the glop. (And before anyone accuses me of misogyny, I kill lots of men in my fiction, too. I'm an equal opportunity murderer of fictional people.) But I made sure that wasn’t their only purpose in the story. In both cases, these characters were in early chapters of their respective novels, and through them I was able to establish details about setting, establish tone, and show the Bad Thing (or Things) in action for the first time. I hope readers come to care—at least a little—about these characters before they died. I know I did. And that's another important secret to horror writing. If you don't give a damn about the characters you slaughter, why should your readers? One of the most common pieces of advice given to beginning writers about characters is to remember that characters are doers. You need to show your characters in action. Don't tell readers your character is an angry man. Show him getting mad at someone and taking action because of his anger. Does he punch a wall? Give the person who angered him the silent treatment? Act as if nothing has happened but plan to get back at the person when he or she least expects it? One of the problems with the characters-are-doers advice for horror writers is that, a lot of the time, our characters are put into situations where they're forced to be reactive. Say your character is walking down a city street on his way to get a haircut. He has a date tonight and wants to look good. As he walks, a shadow falls over him, he hears an ear-splitting shriek, and looks up to see a winged gargoyle-like creature descending toward him, teeth and claws bared, ready to attack. Your character isn't proactive. How can he be? He had no idea a gargoyle-thing would attack him. He can only react. Say your character is an amateur paranormal investigator who's entered an abandoned hospital in search of ghosts. This character is well aware that there might be restless spirits roaming the hospital corridors. In fact, she’s hoping to find some. But when an invisible presence hurls an old gurney at her, she reacts. It’s a weird thing about horror stories, but the prime actor in them often is the Bad Thing the story centers around and your characters are in a constant state of reaction to it. I suppose this is true of all conflict in fiction, but there's a central sinister intent to the Bad Thing in horror that doesn't seem to be present in other genres, at least not as much. The Saw movies are good examples of this. Everything is orchestrated by jigsaw (or one of his disciples or copycats) but we rarely see them. We see only the deadly devices and scenarios they've designed and how characters react to them. Michael is the prime actor in the Halloween franchise (except for the third movie, of course). Because the Bad Thing is the prime mover of the plot, the dark engine at the heart of your story that powers the whole damn thing, there’s a temptation to keep your characters as reactors throughout. This can work in short fiction well enough. The main character in “The Lottery" is primarily reactive. So is the mutant child in “Born of Man and Woman." But if your characters only react throughout the course of a novel and never take the initiative to act, they come across as weak. This is a huge problem for a lot of beginning horror writers. Your characters shouldn't suddenly turn into superheroes, of course, and not all of them will be capable of acting. Some will be injured, some might be too traumatized, some might have fallen under control of the Bad Thing, etc. But somebody better try to do something eventually, or your audience will lose patience with your story. When should your characters shift from reactive in a horror story? That's up to you. Whatever you do, it should feel like a natural outgrowth of their character. The Bad Thing could also bring out something hitherto unknown in a character, such as Sean in Sean of the Dead. As a very general rule of thumb, I'd say maybe three-quarters of the way through a horror novel is a good transition point for characters (about two-thirds of the way for films). It would be sooner if your novel is more of an adventure story than horror, or if there's an investigative aspect to it. You can also have characters attempt to be active at various times throughout the story, in ways both large and small, with outcomes that usually make things worse for them, and which temporarily puts them back into a position of being reactive. Your character(s) can choose to become active, but they can also be forced into it through circumstance, because their backs are against the wall, because they’ve run out of other options, or because the events of the story have traumatized them to the point where they’re no longer thinking straight—or thinking at all—or no longer give a damn what happe s to them. Another aspect to consider when creating characters for horror fiction is that they've often experienced some sort of trauma in the past that has a connection to the present appearance of the Bad Thing—even if it wasn't directly caused by the Bad Thing—or if it has no direct connection to the Bad Thing, it still has an impact on how a character deals with the Bad Thing in the present day. There's often as much looking back in horror as looking forward. Forward is fearing what might happen because of what the Bad Thing will do. Backward is regret, shame, trauma, etc. One of the most basic examples of past trauma connected to a present-day event is in the movie Arachnophobia. The main character was traumatized by a spider crawling into his crib when he was a baby. This spider isn't directly connected to the current spider invasion in the movie, but it makes the main characters battle against the spiders all the more difficult. (Why do people with very specific phobias like this always end up confronting their nightmare scenario in horror movies? Just once I'd like to see someone in a horror film be like, An invasion of giant carnivorous chickens? Thank
god! If it was giant ferrets, I ’d be screwed!) This basic idea works great in Friday the 13th Part 5. Tommy survived the last film, but he’s had hallucinations of Jason ever since. He’s sent to a group home for psychiatric treatments when Jason—who should be dead (and who hasn't been re-imagined as an undead monster in the franchise yet) appears and starts killing anew. In Bradbury’s Something Wicked This Way Comes, a late-in-life father is shamed because he couldn't save his son from drowning years ago. Another man had to do it. If you’re going to use a previous trauma in a character's past in your story, make sure to dramatize it in a flashback. This flashback can be one entire unit of the story (a whole scene or whole chapter) or sprinkled throughout your story in bits and pieces before showing the full experience. But merely saying Bob nearly died in a car accident when he was four isn't enough to engender audience sympathy. We need to experience the accident alongside toddler Bob. Another character concern for horror writers is creating monstrous villains. Sometimes these are people who do terrible things, sometimes they're powerful inhuman forces. Too often, horror writers depict both types of characters as if they're godlike creatures of darkness. I'm not suggesting you have the ancient malign spirit that inhabits a prehistoric burial mound in your story tell your heroes all about its unsuccessful attempts to find love throughout the millennia. Unnatural forces are strongest when they are presented as nonhuman, although you can personify and characterize them to an extent if you want. I often do, especially in my novels. But human monsters are more believable—and effective-if you take some time to develop the human part of them along with the monster part. Watch the film My Friend Dahmer, based on a graphic novel by a man who went to high school with infamous serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer. It shows Dahmer as a person within whom darkness may have existed at a young age, but which grew with the aid or various circumstances during his high-school years. It shows how one person becomes one specific serial killer, as opposed to being a generic serial killer that you'd find on any episode of Criminal Minds. Your human monsters don't  have to be sympathetic overall, but if you can find a glimmer of humanity in them and show it to us, the monstrous side of their nature will loom all the larger and seem even worse. This is where the archetype of the werewolf can come in handy again. The werewolf is a metaphor for humans struggling to reconcile the animal side of their nature with their more civilized, rational side. Your human monsters don’t have to be as emotionally tortured by their existence as a lot of werewolf characters are (and some regretful, self-loathing vampires, too). Human monsters are probably more like some iterations of the Jekyll/ Hyde character, where Jekyll wants an excuse to release his dark side. He wants to be free of his stifling morality, and his chemical formula-and the resultant freedom the persona of Hyde brings—gives him that excuse. Jekyll comes to regret giving into Hyde so completely, but Hyde isn't about to go back into his prison of morality without a fight. Jack Ketchum is an absolute master of the human monster. I'd recommend any of his novels, but for a fantastic example of an ordinary person who little by little is drawn to commit a monstrous act, read I ’m Not Sam, co-authored with Lucky McKee. A lot of how-to-write advice urges writers to create sympathetic characters. But what characters really need to be is interesting or be put into interesting situations. In the film From Dusk till Dawn, a group of criminals end up fighting for their lives in a nest of vampires. Bad guys in an interesting situation. Unsympathetic characters can make for some of the most effective stories. For one thing, since they're not good guys, they're unpredictable. They're not constrained by the same strict moral codes. Think Deadpool compared to Superman. You don't know what the hell Deadpool will do in any situation, but you always know what Superman will do. Another excellent example of an unsympathetic—and monstrous—main character occurs in Kaaron Warren's novel Slights. If you can get your audience to feel empathy for an unsympathetic character, or even root for that person to succeed, you've really done something special. You've gotten your audience to think and feel beyond their normal limitations. Isn’t that what art's all about? The last thing I want to discuss about characters is something I teach all my creative writing students. But I think it might apply especially to horror fiction. In the end, it doesn't matter what age, race, gender, or sexuality your character is. Neither does their background, interests, jobs, likes, or dislikes. What matters most is their psychological makeup—that’s what you use to present your story to your readers. What matters is how they try to solve problems and obtain goals. Do they try to avoid problems for as long as possible? Do they try to manipulate other people into solving problems for them? Will they attempt to obtain goals on their own or will they seek the help of others? How do your characters react to surprises, shocks, traumatic events? To violence? To having their view of reality turned upside-down? How do they respond to impending danger? Concrete vs. abstract threats? Short- term vs. long-term trauma? What would it take to push them past the point of self-control, and what would they be capable of then? So don't be afraid of writing anti-heroes. It might result in some of your best work. All of these things will tell you how a particular character will react to specific story events and what specific actions they will or won’t take. Knowing this stuff has a practical aspect for writers, too. It helps you plot your stories. If you know a character's psychological makeup, you'll be able to easily figure out what moves they'll make in a story. I'd even go so far as to venture that a lot of writers’ block is caused by writers not knowing their characters well enough. And don't just develop the psychological makeup of your main characters. Do it for all your characters, major and minor, so you'll know what they’ll all do. And make them different. One character might act without thinking, another might be afraid of making a mistake and is thus afraid to act, and a third character might hang back and hope the other two get slurped by the glop first. Different styles of problem-solving are what great conflicts arise from. Take advantage of them. At the back of this book, I've included a psychological makeup chart for characters. I hope you'll find it useful.

EXERCISES

1. 

Write a short passage showing (not telling) how a character is: a) angry, b) tired, and c) frustrated. Include all three states in the passage.

2. 

Write three short scenes showing three different ways a character—who is alone—could react to hearing eerie laughter in their bedroom in the middle of the night.

3. 

Take one of the three scenes you wrote for exercise two and continue it, showing how the character moves from being reactive to active.

VOICES FROM THE Shadows

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Daniel Knauff, screenwriter and producer

1. 

Jump-scares and gross-outs are fun, but the gold-standard of horror is the instillation of dread. I don’t aim to make my audience jump; I want them curled up in the corner of the sofa, glancing nervously at the window, wondering if they remembered to bolt the door.

2. 

The single best piece of horror-writing advice I ever received was from Alien screenwriter Dan O’Bannon, who said, “Think of the most horrible thing that could possibly happen, then say to yourself, ‘Okay. Now what’s worse than that."’ 

Somer Canon, author of A Fresh Start

1. 

I think what makes a good horror/dark fantasy/suspense tale is the feeling that it instills in the reader. It’s an experience reading those works, you are stressed and put through the ringer, even in the more light tales. Emotions are hot and high, dread is ever present.

2. 

The best advice that I can give someone writing effective horror/dark fantasy/suspense is to make sure you're being genuine with the emotions and the tale. Scare, anger, and make yourself sad because if you're not feeling it, why should a reader? Write what frightens you because an honesty will come through the work that will be felt by the readers.

Ronald Malfi, award-winning author of Bone White

1.

The most effective horror is the horror that unsettles and disturbs, as opposed to attempting to “scare.” It’s all about atmosphere and dread.

2. 

The best advice is to read a wide variety of horror authors and come to understand why different authors have a different effect on you as you read. Which stories make you squirm? Which ones haunt you for days or months or maybe years afterward? 

John Langan, award-winning author of Sefira and Other Betrayal:

1. 

Maybe the best answer I can give to this question is, the same thing that makes for good fiction in general, and maybe all art, namely, the ability of the reader (or viewer) to return to it over and over again, gaining something new from it each time. I think about Nabokov‘s statement to the effect of, literature is that which we are always re-reading. A good horror story is one you can go back to as often as you like without growing tired of it; it has a quality of inexhaustibility. I think this is due to a combination of factors including style, characterization, plot, and invention; depending on the writer, any one of these elements might be in the ascendancy, but you're likely to find all of them present to one degree or another. For me, the works that fit this description include pretty much everything Peter Straub has written, from Ghost Story, to Shadowland, to Koko, to The Throat, as well as most of his stories. Thomas Tessier’s The Nightwalker falls under this heading, as do King's Pet Sematary and Klein's Dark Gods. So do Jackson's The Haunting of Hill House and We Have Always Lived in the Castle, Robert Aickman‘s stories, and M.R. James’s stories. And Kelly Link and Laird Barron's stories. These are (some of ) the works I pick up on a regular basis to see what they have to offer me; I'm never disappointed. I think you have to figure out what you can write, the kinds of stories only you can tell, and tell them to the best of your ability. This means digging deep into yourself to find out what it is you can, and maybe have to, do as a writer. 

2.

I think you have to commit to what you’re doing, which is to say, you have to concentrate on telling the story at hand in the best way possible, the way it demands to be told, even at the risk of it (and you) appearing ridiculous. I think you should always be operating just the slightest bit out of your comfort zone, and at or beyond the limits of your ability. If you're worried about things like audience or especially market, then I think there's a danger of you hobbling your imagination. Perhaps the most important thing to remember is that the purpose of you writing is to communicate that which only you can communicate, using this particular medium. It's not to get rich, or make a lot of friends. Those things may happen, of course, but the means by which they do so are so idiosyncratic as to be almost random. If you can write something that reaches one other person, that moves them in a deep and profound way, then you’ve achieved something important.

CHAPTER TWELVE

HURTS SO GOOD

This is one of the most important things to know about writing fiction (I say this a lot, don't I? That’s because every time it’s true): All stories are about people in pain—people who are suffering and what they do to alleviate that suffering. Now this pain might be mild. A story written for preschoolers about a boy who loses his favorite toy and looks all over the house for it before finally finding it does not deal with deep, lasting, life-changing pain. But the child hurts, and the loss of his beloved toy might feel like the end of the world to him. How characters attempt to deal with pain and how those attempts change them is the core plot of every story. A character in a romance novel who tries to resist their attraction to someone experiences desire, confusion, frustration. In other words, pain. A character in a fantasy novel who seeks to defeat the Dark Lord is desperate to save her land and its people. She experiences grief for those affected by the Dark Lord’s power, fear of what will happen to the land if she fails, fear of what she might have to sacrifice to succeed. Pain. 
Books on the basics of writing fiction classify dealing with pain (if they discuss it at all) as being part of conflict—the obstacles or problems a character must deal with. But talking about obstacles and problems focuses on aspects of the story outside the character. Pain happens inside. And what's painful for one character might not be painful for another. I once had a student in a creative writing class who wrote romance stories in which there was absolutely no conflict. Two people would meet, date, fall in love, and get married. The End. I tried repeatedly to get the student to add some conflict—any conflict—to her stories, but she couldn't. “I can't be mean to my characters," she said. But being mean to our characters is the whole point. Writers must be sadists, putting our characters through painful experiences that push them to their breaking point and perhaps beyond. Writers are the gods of our universes, but we shouldn't be loving, benevolent gods. We should be like the god in the story of Job, who—in order to win a bet with Satan—puts one of his most faithful worshipers through hell, killing his wife and children, reducing him to poverty, afflicting him with disease, all to show that a truly devout person will not curse god's name, even after experiencing so much tragedy. You would think horror writers wouldn’t have much trouble being mean to their characters. After all, the word horror clearly indicates emotional pain. It's the only genre whose name itself focuses on pain. Yet I’ve seen many horror stories from students in which the characters aren't emotionally impacted by the story events. They might experience physical pain, but that's it. These writers only told part of a story—and the least interesting part at that. They didn't tell the story of their characters’ overall pain. In horror, characters are often under the threat of physical violence, injury, and ultimately death. But the mental, emotional, and spiritual wounds characters suffer can be far worse than physical pain. Make sure that death isn’t the worst thing that can happen to your characters—not by a long shot. Let's talk about some ways to deal with the different varieties of pain in your fiction. 

Physical Pain. 

In the next chapter, I'll go into more detail on the effects fear has on the human body and mind. For now, I'll talk about the physical effects of other kinds of pain. First off, learn what happens to the human body when it gets injured. My family and I recently went to the movie theater to watch Crawl, a film in which alligators invade a home during a hurricane in Florida. I showed up for killer alligators, and I was not disappointed in that regard. Lots o‘ gator action. Unfortunately, the filmmakers didn't bother to research the effects of alligator bites on the human body. Characters would get bitten—repeatedly—and they were still able to function physically. No broken bones, no torn muscle, no shredded tendons. And no ill effects due to blood loss, either. While I found this annoying, I didn't let it bother me too much. I was there for gator action, remember? But my wife is a former EMT, and the completely unrealistic way the film dealt with the characters’ injuries spoiled the film for her. (Although she did enjoy the alligators. Who wouldn't? Alligators are awesome.) She's not a horror fan, but she does like monster movies, and watching them with her is always a great education in how physical injuries should impact characters. But for those of you who aren't lucky enough to have someone like my wife in your life, just hit Google and research what injuries you plan to inflict on your characters—or check out David W. Page's fantastic book Body Trauma: A Writer's Guide to Wounds and Injuries. Find out what the characters can and can't do after they’re injured. Find out how much a specific injury would hurt and whether a character would be able to continue to function with that level of pain. Find out what the longer-term effects of an injury are. Will your character eventually pass out? Die from internal bleeding? Need surgery to survive? Yeah, but what about adrenaline? you ask. Doesn't adrenaline help numb pain and give people a burst of extra strength to keep going? We’ll talk about the effects of stress chemicals like adrenaline in the next chapter, but the short answer is adrenaline helps—somewhat—in the short term. But it doesn't last and won’t restore function to a limb that's been, for example, shredded by an alligator’s teeth. Adrenaline won’t repair damage. It's not magic. And you wouldn’t want it to be. Injuries are complications, and complications make things harder for your characters, increasing tension and making your story more interesting. Wolverine is a cool superhero, but he becomes most interesting when his healing factor is removed, as in Old Man Logan. Then he is forced to work to win fights while trying not to get killed. Same with characters like Superman who are invulnerable. How much an injury affects your characters depends on their personalities—their psychological makeup we discussed in the last chapter. How does a character react to getting injured, and how does the severity of the injury change their reaction? This also counts for their reaction to witnessing others getting injured or killed. How does a specific character react to seeing a good buddy get chomped by the Bad Thing? If you can't find what you're looking for by reading articles on the web, find a writers’ message board where you can ask questions, or better yet, a message board that deals with medical and health issues. Cultivate a network of experts on social media. Ask your family doctor. Marry someone who used to be an EMT. Whatever. A quick aside while we're talking about physical pain. In real life, people have all sorts of medical issues. I'm near-sighted, diabetic, have sleep apnea, suffer from depression and anxiety, and have probably a half dozen milder conditions, such as seasonal allergies. Overall, I take my meds, use my CPAP machine when I sleep, see my doctor regularly, so I'm in good health generally (so no need to worry about me). But characters in fiction are almost always in good health when the story begins, unless they have something really awful, like terminal cancer, which turns out to be important to the plot. I remember watching an episode of the medical drama Ha use in which one of the characters said they could pull in anyone off the street at random and find at least three things wrong with them. So when you create your characters, consider what medical issues they have—and they will have some—and how (or if) those issues will effect their physical (or mental) performance during the story. For example, in my novel The Forever House, I gave one character bad knees, which made it difficult for her to run from danger. And that reminds me—what's your characters’ fitness levels? Unless they’re like Columbus in Zombie Land who knows cardio is one of the best survival tools in a world overrun by ravenous undead, your character may not be in action-hero shape. And how psychologically prepared are they to commit acts of violence themselves? Most people never have to use deadly violence in their lives and are emotionally reluctant to do so, if not completely repulsed by the idea. If one of your characters gets physically injured in your story, why doesn't he or she head immediately to the nearest ER? Why don't they just drop out of the story for a while so they have time to recover? Injured characters need a good reason to keep going. Many of my horror novels take place over the span of several hours up to a full day. And in those that cover several days, the main action usually takes place in a short time. My characters don't have any more time to tend to their injuries than soldiers on a battlefield. Read up on emergency first aid, and remember, not all of your characters are going to automatically know how to deal with injuries. Maybe none of them. And don't forget that all kinds of nasty things happen to people when they have a wound that isn't tended to properly. Poorly treated wounds can get infected, resulting in sepsis and possibly death. So, physical pain and injury. Treat them realistically. If you fudge just a little, most readers and viewers won't notice or care. Otherwise, they won't be able to suspend their disbelief anymore (like my wife during Crawl). Now let's talk about emotional pain for a bit.

Emotional Pain. 

Fear is only one type of emotional pain. Loss, grief, despair, sorrow, anxiety, shame, rage, resentment, guilt, surprise (as in a shocking surprise, not a happy, welcome one), confusion, disgust, hatred . . . Your characters might experience any or all of these emotions in your horror story along with fear. The more impactful the event—and the more of a monstrous distortion of reality it is—the stronger the characters’ emotional reactions will be. They’ll also have emotional reactions to other characters, the actions of the characters, and the aftermath of those actions (and the aftermath of their own actions). One of the best ways to make the unreal feel real in your stories is to present realistic emotional reactions to it on the part of your characters. One of the most common comments I make on a student-written horror story is Any emotional reaction? Students will have a Bad Thing—a hideous monster, wailing ghost, whatever—confront a character, and the character has no emotional reaction whatsoever (or the character's emotional reaction is mentioned briefly in summary several paragraphs later). The character might turn and run, but that’s focusing on what's happening outside the character. Good fiction moves back and forth between characters‘ inner and outer worlds as needed. I loved the move Hereditary—yes, even the ending—but the best part of it for me was Toni Collette's searing portrayal of a woman in deep emotional pain. Without that element, the film would've been just another horror movie for me. I would've enjoyed it well enough, but it wouldn't have moved me emotionally. Collette’s character reacts to the prime inciting event—the death of her daughter—and she experiences a range of emotions and her grief manifests in various ways. A Bad Thing that breaks your leg isn’t as scary as one that forces you to face your secret shame. Or one that harms those you love in order to hurt you. Or one that can remove all your best memories or one that can destroy your very identity. Characters that contend with Bad Things that inflict emotional pain would welcome physical wounds in its place. Remember, by the god of Job: make your characters suffer. Sometimes, physical pain is easier to bear than emotional pain. Of course, if your characters are forced to experience both in your stories, then they’re really in trouble. Sometimes I think horror writers rely on physical pain so much in their stories because it creates a clear visual image—and likely because they’ve seen physical pain depicted in a lot of horror films. Plus, on a basic level, physical pain is easier to write about than emotional pain. I can describe the sound of flesh being peeled away from someone's back and get a quick visceral reaction from my readers (probably Disgust). But briefly describing grief and getting an immediate reaction from a reader? I think that's a lot more difficult. Still, it's extremely worthwhile to master description of emotional states. Even if you write the most splattery of extreme horror fiction, your stories will be far more effective if your characters suffer on an emotional level as well. A good resource for writing about emotion is Karl Eglesias' book Writing for Emotional Impact.

Mental Pain. 

Mental pain can be lumped in with emotional, but I think of it as more an intellectual realization that provokes an emotional reaction. A character becomes aware that he or she must die to save others. Superman’s father Jor-El becomes aware that Krypton is doomed, but he can’t get anyone to believe him. It's what provokes the emotional response that's different when it comes to mental pain. Some of your characters might be more prone to this type of pain than others. Someone who has strong, immediate emotional reactions might not be as thoughtful or introspective enough to think through the steps to reach a conclusion that leads to mental pain. They may be too focused on themselves and the immediate threat they're dealing with to have the luxury of taking time to think. Or they may be so intellectually focused that they have difficulty allowing themselves to have emotional reactions. As with everything else in fiction, it all depends on the particular character. Scientists in 1950's SF/horror films feel mental pain. The Doctor—from Doctor Who—feels both mental and emotional pain, but probably more of the former than the latter, although the exact proportion would depend on the particular regeneration.

Spiritual Pain. 

This type of pain can also be classified with emotional, but I consider this to be a soul-deep pain that relates to a character’s relationship with higher spiritual forces, whether those forces are literal gods or ethical principles such as justice, decency, fairness, generosity, etc. For me, the best example of spiritual pain is Father Callahan from Salem's Lot. After the priest’s failed attempt to confront the master vampire Barlow—during which Barlow made Callahan drink some of his unholy blood— Callahan tries to return to his church. But when he touches the front doorknob, he receives a powerful shock of energy. He instantly understands what this means—for him as a man and as a servant of the Christian god. (Don't worry. The father finds redemption in King’s Dark Tower series.) A great example of the moral/ethical aspect of spiritual pain comes at the end of Watchmen, when Rorschach—after Ozymandius’ plan has succeeded and he’s actually saved the world, but at a terrible cost—cannot bring himself to abandon his strict black-and-white, right-or-wrong view of the world. Rorschach demands Dr. Manhattan kill him because he knows he'll never be able to accept what has happened. In fact, he’ll do everything he can to let people know about it. He’s also (in my interpretation) tired of living in a cruel world of moral ambiguity. Spiritual pain indeed. Spiritual pain is one of the highest levels of pain, and if you can include it as one of the types of pain characters experience, your stories will be all the richer for it. Best of all is if you can include all types of pain—physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual—in the same story. You'd probably need the length of a novella or novel, though. Not only will your story be more layered and impactful, but if it's possible for your characters to experience any one of the four types of pain in your stories, your fiction will be more unpredictable, and a sudden shift from one type of pain to another can catch readers off guard, thus allowing you to up the “unknown” factor, keeping your readers off balance, never letting them feel safe with your stories—all things good horror should do. As I did for the last chapter, I've created a resource to help you develop your characters, in this case, a Pain Reaction Questionnaire. You can find it as Appendix D in the back of this book.

EXERCISES

1. 

What kind of pain do you respond to most strongly as a reader? Least strongly? Why? What is there about these types that cause you to have (or not have) a strong reaction to them?

2. 

Write the same short scene four times, emphasizing a different type of pain each time: physical, emotional, mental, spiritual. When you're finished, write the scene a fifth time, blending all four types of pain.

3. 
Pick one type of pain you feel you have difficulty writing about. Or one you can't stand reading about, for whatever reason. Write an entire short story using only this type and see how it turns out. Better than you thought? Worse? Why?

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

S.P. Miskowski, author of The Worst Is Yet to Come

1. 

Good horror captures the uncertainty of existence. It hints at the unfathomable and infinite range of life itself. It creates a vehicle for expressing the human response to the vast and largely inhospitable cosmos.

2. 

The more you explore your deepest, most personal fears and obsessions, the more your work will connect with readers of many backgrounds and experiences. It is the paradox of art: the more passionately personal it is, the more universal it seems. You can't achieve that by trying to generalize or stereotype. Specificity and passion will convey what is at the heart of your story. Most readers will recognize this. So, read widely and learn from great writers, but always strive to tell your own story— however magical or realistic—in your own way.

Joseph Zettelmaier, award-winning playwright

1. 

Millions of different things can make horror work, but I feel the key to horror is provoking a visceral response . . . something so deeply internal that you're not entirely aware it’s there till it happens. It can be the traditional jump—scare, it can be a sense of looming dread, it can be the revulsion of body horror. Whatever it is, it's deeply primal and it stays with you long after you first experience it.

2. 

Nothing is scary if we're not invested in the people it's happening to. The best horror writing comes from character . . . when we connect to them, feel for them in some way, then we experience what they experience. Now if you can merge great characters with a well thought out plot where things pay off and avoid the easily predictable? Then you've got something. 

Guy N. Smith, author of The Charnel Caves

1. 

Keep the reader guessing, don't give too much away early in the book. End each chapter with a shock/surprise. This makes it a page-turner rather than a stereotyped plot.

2. 

Do some research first. Get your facts rights. Set the book in a specific place/town/village etc. If you describe the setting correctly, and you must, that will create sales within that vicinity.

Richard Chizmar, publisher of Cemetery Dance magazine and author of Gwendyk Magic Feather

1. 

For me, it’s all about Story. If I can lose myself in the writer's imaginary world and grow to care about the characters, if I feel my heart and soul are fully invested, then I'm a happy prisoner to that story until the final sentence. That’s all I can ask for as a reader.

2. 

Read as much as you can—both inside and outside of the genre—and write as much as you can. There is no secret recipe. Accept that learning to write good stories is a long and bumpy process. Look at rejection as a badge of honor, something to be expected—and earned—even more than eventual success.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FEAR

You’d think that if writers intend to make a career in a genre named for a specific emotion that they'd want to learn everything they could about how that emotion affects humans so they could write effectively about it. But most horror writers rely solely on depictions of fear that they’ve read in stories or seen on film. They might draw on times in their lives when they were afraid, but unless they've been in true life-or-death situations, that experience is limited. Or they try to imagine how fear might affect someone. But there’s no need to imagine, not when physicians and psychologists know how fear affects humans’ minds and bodies —and that's what this chapter is all about. I used several sources to help me write about the physiology of fear, and they're listed at the end of this chapter if you'd like to check them out for yourself. Fear isn't just psychological; it's physical. Why do people feel tense during a scary scene in a movie? Why do our hearts pound and our breathing become rapid? Because our bodies don't know the difference between what’s real and what isn't. And there’s a simple reason for this: nothing in nature is unreal, and your body can’t afford to take a chance that what you’re experiencing might hurt or even kill you. If a squirrel is foraging in a field and a shadow falls upon it—say from a passing cloud—the squirrel will flee in case that shadow is caused by a rapidly descending hawk. The squirrel doesn't have a sophisticated enough brain to ask itself whether the threat is real and then look up to verify it. And if it was smart enough to do that, it might hesitate long enough for a hawk to strike. Nature has a very simple credo for survival: run or hide first and ask questions later. So just as our friend the squirrel’s body reacts to even the suggestion of a threat, so too do our bodies. It takes experience and desensitization for us to counteract the signals our body gives us. The more horror movies you watch, the less your brain will react as if what it's perceiving is real. I sometimes wonder what this process does to us. We live in a world we created in which so many things aren't real, and we train ourselves to deny what our senses perceive throughout the course of a day. That doesn't seem like it would be a good path to mental health, does it?
This desensitization is a key component of military training. Soldiers need to be able to deal with fear and not let it control them when they're in a battle situation so they have the best chance to accomplish their objective while hopefully ensuring their survival and the survival of their comrades. And even with all the training they receive, they can still experience panic. The body is that powerful. So unless your characters are action-adventure heroes with lots of experience fighting bad guys and surviving dangerous situations, they are going to experience the full force of physical fear when they are confronted with the Bad Thing in your stories. And if you're going to write realistically about their reactions—which, as I've mentioned before, is an important tool in making the unreal seem real to readers—you need to know what the human body does in response to perceiving a threat. Fight or flight response. We all learn about this in elementary school science. Flight or fight is an instinctive, immediate response to danger. The key words here are instinctive and immediate. The SyFy Channel once aired a series called Scare Tactics in which unsuspecting people were subjected to nightmare scenarios to see how they'd react. As far as I’m concerned, shows like this are cruel and highly unethical, but they are instructive for horror writers. We get to see real people responding to what they believe is an actual Bad Thing. One episode featured a group of people being driven in a limo down a desert road. The vehicle lost power, its engine died, and it rolled to a stop. Strange lights appeared and an alien creature approached the car and tore off one of the doors. Everyone in the limo—the man's friends and his girlfriend, along with the driver—was in on the prank except for one poor bastard. The moment the “alien” pulled off the door, the man threw open the opposite door, shot out of the limo, and sped away from the car like he was the Flash. He didn’t yell, didn’t scream, didn’t say anything to his companions. He just bolted. I sometimes wonder what his girlfriend thought about how he abandoned her without a second’s hesitation. I wouldn’t be surprised if their relationship ended soon after that episode finished filming. The man’s reaction was completely unthinking. His body reacted before his mind could even begin to process what was happening. Instinctively and immediately. A different person might have jumped out of the car and attacked the alien, again without thinking. And the thing is, none of us can know how we'd react in a threatening situation until it happens. I think a lot of people—maybe most—would either freeze in place or try to hide. Both of these reactions could be slotted into the flight category, I suppose. They are ways to try to escape a threat. There are all kinds of ways to fight, too. In King’s story “Lunch at the Gotham Café," a husband and wife on the verge of divorce meet at a cafe. The husband wants to reconcile with the wife, but the wife is ambivalent about the idea. One of the waiters has a psychotic break and starts killing the staff and diners. The husband, wanting to get his wife to safety, grabs hold of her hand and leads her to the kitchen. The homicidal waiter follows, blood-slick knife in hand. The husband stands in front of his wife to protect her, and she plants a foot on his lower back and shoves him toward the waiter. She fights by offering someone else as a sacrifice to the Bad Thing. This action was instinctive on her part, but it also revealed an important truth about her character and about how she felt about her husband and their marriage. As with anything else in a story, how a character responds to an immediate threat tells us—not to mention the other characters in the story—a great deal about them. One of the things to ask yourself about your characters is which reaction they would have to danger. Fight or flight? And how specifically would they do either? Try to vary how your characters would respond so you don't have all of them hauling ass away from the threat as a group or rushing toward it to confront it. Plus, if their reaction is surprising and maybe even shameful to them, it can add another interesting layer to their character and have consequences for the rest of the story. After that Scare Tactics episode with the fake UFO landing and alien attack, do you think the terrified man's friends would trust him to stand with them in a dangerous—or even merely stressful—situation and help them? Hell, no. They would feel as if they couldn't rely on him, that they couldn’t trust him. And that would make for a useful complication in a story. Low road and high road. These terms are ways to describe the two levels of fear response. The low road is an immediate, more physical reaction. The high road is a bit slower, more thoughtful. Both happen simultaneously. Your body and your mind react to a fear stimulus in your environment at the same time. Your body gets the jump on your mind, but the mind isn't far behind. The man in Scare Tactics reached for the door as the rubber-suited “alien” approached the limo. That was his body reacting first. But then his mind would've kicked in and he could’ve told himself Aliens aren't real. This isn't real. What the hell's going on? In that case, he might have hesitated, waiting to get more data before responding further. Or he might’ve figured Screw it, Maybe it's real, maybe it's not, but I ’m out of here. Knowing that low road and high road reactions both occur, in that order, will help you write more effectively about how your characters react to an immediate threat. The high road can temper or even counteract the low road. A character like Sherlock Holmes or Spock might have an initial physical reaction to a threat, but their powerful intellects would quickly override that reaction, reasserting control and allowing them to act rationally. Knowing your characters’ low road reaction to fear and their high road reaction will allow you to write about them facing danger even more realistically. Plus, if there's conflict between their low and high road reactions, you can evoke more tension in a scene. It's all in your head. During a fear response, your hypothalamus simultaneously activates the sympathetic nervous system (which triggers nerves) and the adrenal-cortex system (which dumps hormones into the body). The sympathetic nervous system causes the body to become tense and alert. The adrenal-cortical system is activated, releasing thirty different hormones into the body to prepare to handle the threat. Physical reactions caused by hormones released in the fear response. Among these reactions are: 

- Increased heart rate and blood pressure.

- Dilated pupils to take in as much light as possible.

- Constriction of veins in skin, which causes the chilly sensation associated with fear.

- Increased blood glucose.

- Tensing of muscles and goose bumps.

- Relaxation of smooth muscles.

- Shutting down of nonessential systems such as digestion and the immune system.

- Difficulty concentrating on small tasks (brain is directed to focus on the big picture).

Now you wouldn't describe all those things in a scene. Writing Bob saw the monster approaching, and in response he felt his smooth muscles relax would be ridiculous. Besides, we’re not aware of all these different things happening at the time. But we'd be aware of our bodies tensing, of our heart rate increasing, and we might also be aware of our inability to focus on details (especially if we start running and fail to see something small right in front of us and trip over it). Or if we're frantically searching through our key ring to find our house key—the one we use every day—but can't recognize it because we're too scared of the Bad Thing behind us to focus. Once the threat diminishes, the body releases cortisol to calm itself back down. This calming is not instantaneous, nor is it comfortable. You may feel weak, shaky, dizzy, nauseated. Maybe you'll throw up, or maybe you'll get a bad headache. The stress chemicals in your body don't just vanish altogether, and you might feel extremely nervous for a time after the danger has passed. Effects of long-term exposure to stress-related hormones. Stress hormones take a toll on the human body. Here are some of the effects your characters might experience:

- More colds and infections.

- Sexual disorders.

- Aches and pains.

- Fatigue.

- Loss of appetite.

Post-traumatic stress disorder. 

PTSD is real and it affects more than soldiers returning home from war. Anyone who's experienced trauma, especially repeated trauma over time, can have PTSD. So if any of your characters had an encounter with a Bad Thing in the past, like the kids in It, they might well experience some of the following effects associated with PTSD. And a number of these effects could lead to important conflicts/complications in a story. Sufferers often have elevated levels of the hormones associated with fight or flight. (So they might react either way but far more swiftly—and perhaps dramatical1y—than other characters.) They may experience symptoms when the situation doesn’t warrant it. (They can have flashbacks triggered by seemingly harmless stimuli. The smell of lilacs brings back the emotions of being abused by someone wearing lilac scent, for example. Or a character reacts to a loud noise as if it's a gun firing.) Bodies may react as though a threat is real when reminded of a traumatic event. (Again, flashbacks triggered by stimuli. A character could even encounter something specifically related to the traumatic event: they could unexpectedly run into a former abuser in public, see a photo of a crime scene they were involved in, etc.) The body loses the ability to shut off‘ the process when it's not needed. (Random panic attacks for seemingly no reason. Your brain and body are hyper-ready to go into fight or flight mode at anything even remotely resembling danger.) 

Depression.

Substance abuse. (Characters might try to self—medicate without realizing that’s what they're doing.)

Memory and cognition problems.

Difficulty functioning in social or family life.

Occupational instability.

Marital problems and divorces.

- Family discord.

- Difficulty parenting.

So how does all this impact your writing? Answer these questions for the characters in your story:

- How does your character's body work during fear? After fear?

- How do your character's senses perform during fear?

- How effectively can your character process information when experiencing fear?

- How does your character react long-term to fear?

- Has past trauma for your character resulted in PTSD? If so, what effects of PTSD are your character experiencing?

- Has your character gotten any help, professional or otherwise, for long-term effects of fear? The more you know about how your characters experience and respond to fear, the more realistically you'll be able to portray them in your horror fiction—and the more story possibilities you’ll open up. Sources: Curiosity.com, “Neuroscience Psychology.” Jefferson Glassie, “The Long-Term Effects of Fear.” Julia Layton, “How Pear Works." Cheryl MacDonald, “What are the Emotional Effects of Terror?"

EXERCISES

1. 

Free-write about a time when you experienced intense fear. (If this is too traumatic for you to do, skip this exercise.) Try to describe what it was like for you physically and psychologically. Was there anything about your reactions that surprised you, that struck you as being out of character for you? What did you learn about yourself from experiencing fear?

2. 

Write a scene focusing on a character experiencing/dealing with the physical effects of fear.

3. 

Write a scene focusing on a character experiencing/dealing with the psychological effects of fear.

4. 

Write a scene focusing on a character experiencing/dealing with the long—term effects of fear‘

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Don D’Auria, executive editor of Flame Tree Press

1. 

For me the key to good, effective horror is emotion, and by that I don’t mean just the obvious emotion of fear. We need all emotion; we need to see the characters as real people, and we need to become emotionally involved with them. Without that, all we have are cardboard cutouts being threatened or killed. But if we can identify with the characters as people, if we can feel what they’re feeling, then we care much more about their survival and the book or story becomes much more powerful.

2.

It's old advice, but if you want to write in any genre, you need to read in that genre. I'm not suggesting you become derivative or copy anyone, but if you read, you can see what works for you, you can see how other writers have handled certain aspects of writing. You can see how a particular author mastered pacing, for example, or how another drew you into the story through characterization. You can learn different styles, different techniques. Then incorporate the best of what you've learned into your own distinct style.

Stephanie M. Wytovich, award-winning author of The Apocalyptic Mannequin

1.

For me, good horror/dark fantasy/suspense—and honestly, good literature in general—contains a story that makes me challenge everything I've been taught to believe is true: my faith, my morals, my political associations, etc. I want something that is going to force me to dissect my relationship with my version of what I know to be true, and that way, I'm not only putting myself into the story, but it's shaping and reshaping my ideology of who I am on this planet. A good horror story (and a good scare) can do a lot of good in the world, and the opportunity for social commentary alongside a monstrous creature is both rife and palpable, a piece of entertainment and an invitation to evaluate the world around you. 

2.

Research. Horror is an intense genre for a lot of different reasons and its fans are serious diehards, which is great, but they'll definitely know if something is off in the story or not factually correct. Having said that, you'll want to take the time to thoroughly research your subject material and ask questions if you need to, both to professionals in the field you're writing about, or to your colleagues and friends. Also note that we have a wonderful community that is always ready to help and provide resources and experiences that can help your story jump off the page, so get involved, read everything, and throw out that old adage, “Write what you know.” Challenge yourself. Learn. Your readers will love you for it because that material will be fresh, realistic, and if done right, equally terrifying.

Russell R. James, author of The Playing Card Killer

1.

The best horror taps into the reader's deepest fears. Often these change over time. In 1956, Invasion of the Body Snatchers played on fears of Communist infiltration creating a soulless society. Today Black Mirror exploits our anxiety about technology's impact on our future.

2.

To write the most effective horror, make the reader care about the character in danger. Once the reader is invested in that character, the reader will feel the terror the protagonist feels, instead of just reading about it. 

Matt Cardin, author of To Rouse Leviathan

1.

Good writing of this type fuses horror and dread with a kind of hypnotic fascination. It's an ancient paradox: What's dreadful is also, somehow, mesmerizing. We're drawn to what terrifies and horrifies us. The best stories of horror, dark fantasy, and/or suspense tend to be rooted squarely in this primal emotional effect.

2.

a) Gorge yourself on reading. Don't limit yourself to horror/dark/fantasy/suspense. b) Devote some reflection to how this type of writing works, how it functions as narrative storytelling to cast that dark spell of fear and fascination. c) Search for the center of your own response. Divine the core of your personal attraction to tales of darkness and dread. Learn to write from this core. d) Find your native subject matter, the idiosyncratic theme or themes that your life has naturally geared you to care about and write about. Note that these are your master map not just for writing but for life. e) Master the technical side: grammar, punctuation, spelling, sentence structure, stylistic and rhetorical modes. This is non-negotiable. f) Learn to court the muse. Honor her when she shows up and speaks. It's not perspiration versus inspiration, it's both at once. It's inspiration manifested through perspiration. g) Learn when to ignore advice, including this right here.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

TELL ME A SCARY STORY

Teaching beginning writers how to plot is hard. In essence, you're trying to teach someone how to build something when they can't touch the materials they're working with, can't watch a demonstration of someone building the thing, can't get their hands on a finished physical product to take apart, can't follow a pre-made step-by-step blueprint, and so on. Creative writing g teachers show their students visual representations of plot structure in the hope that it'll help. But there's really not much to show about Classic Plot Design, which follows the ever-popular Hero's Journey. It's a simple linear progression from beginning to end, with a few basic elements labeled. There's nothing wrong with the Hero's Journey pattern. But the diagram doesn't give writers much to work with, and it really doesn't help people who don't think linearly as they create—which, let's face it, is most of us. Classic Plot Design is especially unhelpful for writers who wish to produce more literary, character-centered fiction. Still, Classic Plot Design has been around for a hell of a long time, and that's because general audiences respond to it so well. So we'll discuss it in this chapter, along with alternative techniques for plotting. First off, let's talk about writing the short stuff.

ADVICE FOR WRITING SHORT STORIES

Length. 

As a rule of thumb, short stories tend to be around 1,000-5,000 words (4-20 pages). They of course can be shorter or longer, but this is a solidly marketable range, as well as a good range for beginners. It's long enough to practice the basics but not so long that writers are too intimidated to revise.

Keep it simple. 

Keep your ambitions in check when learning to write short stories. Avoid massive research or worldbuilding. Elaborate research and worldbuilding can make a story so complicated that you can't properly tend to the basics of characterization, dialogue, etc.

Story content. 

Use violence, sex, politics, profanity, religion, etc. when necessary to serve the needs of the story. Don’t try to shock readers with naughty words and sexy scenes or beat them over the head with political or religious messages. The story is what's most important. But follow market guidelines, too. If a magazine says that it will not publish a story that portrays violence against children, don't submit that kind of story to that particular market. Editors say beginning writers ignore their guidelines all the time, and it's a sure way to receive a fast rejection.

Short time frame. 

One way to keep a short story under control—as well as to maximize its intensity—is to limit the events to a relatively short amount of time: minutes, hours, maybe a day or two at most. Limit the number of characters. Only have two or three main characters, and don't add too many supporting characters. There‘s not a lot of room in a short story (obviously), and because of this, you don't have the opportunity to fully develop more than a couple characters, and there's only enough time for readers to become emotionally invested in one or two. If you have too many characters in a story, it makes the story too complex for its length and makes it difficult—if not impossible—for readers to connect emotionally.

Limit the setting. 

Another way to maintain focus in a short story is to confine the action to one setting. This can be as limited as one room, one house, one street, one town, etc. The fewer settings there are in your story, the fewer times readers’ imaginations will be yanked from one setting and plunked down into another. Such transitions can be jarring for readers, and unless you're looking to create such a jarring effect, keeping the setting limited works best. 

Point of view. 

In general, stick to one character’s point of view in a short story. As I said above, too many shifts in a story can be jarring for readers. Readers need time to attach to a point of view in a story, and while novels have plenty of room for readers to become attached to multiple viewpoints, a short story doesn't. 

Simple story problem. 

Stick to one main story problem. Again, novels have room for multiple—and major and minor—story problems. Short stories do not. Stay focused on one story problem, and your story will have more impact on readers.

Scenes. 

In general, try not to have more than two or three scenes in a short story. Again, for the same reason I keep mentioning: short stories don't have a lot of room.

Obstacles. 

Avoid having too many obstacles (because . . . you guessed it: short stories are short). There’s room for a number of simple obstacles, such as a locked door or a character who momentarily doubts another. There's less room for major obstacles such as an earthquake or a Kaiju attack. Begin close to the end. One way to keep a story short and focused is to begin telling it as close to the climax as you can. If I was writing a story about a person trying to defuse a bomb, I’d begin with the character already in the process of defusing it, and then I'd work in whatever backstory was needed, prob ably in the form of short snatches of memory that pass through the person's mind, distracting him or her while working. Not only is this a great way to keep your story focused, it can maximize story tension as well. 

Plotting novels. 

“The novel is a prose narrative of some length that has something wrong with it." —Randall Jarrell

“There are three rules to writing a novel. Unfortunately, no one knows what they are." —W. Somerset Maugham

“A story should have a beginning, a muddle, and an end." —Philip Larkin

Length: 

50,000 words minimum. No maximum length, but publishers most often call for lengths between 80,000 to 120,000 words,

Novels vs. short stories. 

A short story is an event; a novel is a series of events that add up to a much larger journey.

- There are (or at least can be) a greater number of characters: major and minor.

- You can explore the setting in greater detail and perhaps have multiple settings.

- You can explore the history or background of your characters and setting in more detail.

- The conflict tends to be deeper and more widespread.

- There's more opportunity to explore them in greater depth.

If you're just starting to write novels . . . Writing a novel for the first time (or first few times) is hard enough. Don't make it harder on yourself than it needs to be while you're still learning how to do it. With that in mind, here are some tips to make writing a novel more manageable.

- Avoid super complex structures—lots of flashbacks, a zillion subplots, multi-generational sagas.

- Avoid having a ton of characters in your novel.

- Avoid switching between too many settings.

- Avoid stories that require a massive amount of research.

Action-Idea. 

Over the years in my creative writing classes, I noticed that student fiction—short stories and novels both—didn’t have a centralized focus. I understood instinctively what I was seeing (or rather, not seeing) in their stories, but I struggled to articulate this to students. Then one day I was reading Michael Tierno’s book Aristotle's Poetics for Screenwriters. In it, he talks about the concept of the Action-Idea, and that's when I knew that I'd found what I'd been searching for—a way to communicate the concept of centralized focus in a story. Here’s how Tierno breaks the concept down.

- An Action-Idea is the story’s “mission statement."

- An Action-Idea is the foundation of the entire story.

- An Action-Idea creates emotion in the audience.

- A good novel expands an Action-Idea into a full-length story without losing the essence of the simple idea upon which it is based.

- Action is the Idea of the story.

- Action is more important than characters (when building a novel's foundation).

- The hero is whoever takes the lead in the story's action.

Example: jaws is a story about a man trying to stop a killer shark. Sheriff Brody is the hero.

The idea for jaws is an action upon which the entire story is based: trying to stop a killer shark. The sheriff is responsible for protecting his community, but he faces a threat that none of his training or experience has prepared him for. That's the emotional element of the Action-Idea at the core of jaws. A lot of writers dislike approaching plot too mechanically. They'd rather let their stories grow organically. And some writers think plot is a dirty word. But play around with the concept of the Action-Idea. See if you can write the Action-Idea for your next story or novel as a single sentence, and then use that sentence to grow your story from. You might discover that your work has a stronger centralized focus.

Inciting incident. 

The inciting incident is an episode, plot point or event that hooks the reader into the story. This particular moment is when an event thrusts the protagonist into the main action of the story. Beginner's stories (short ones and novel-length ones) often take way too long to get started. The writing begins pages or even chapters before the actual story finally starts, and when it does start, it's often not clear that it is starting or just what it is. Employing the concept of inciting incident can give your story a much stronger, clearer beginning.

- The inciting incident happens in the first act (the sooner, the better).

- The inciting incident happens to the protagonist.

- The protagonist is usually passive at this juncture; the inciting incident is generally set in motion by someone or something else.

- The inciting incident is when the character’s situation changes—for the worse.

Classic Plot Design. 

I mention this plot design at the beginning of the chapter. Some writers like to use this pattern because it's known and comfortable, and general audiences respond to it well. Other writers find it too simplistic and mechanical. But it’s a good technique if you see your work as primarily being entertainment. Here's how it works:

- Begin with a character who has a goal.

- The goal can be intrinsic to the character (internal) or imposed on the character (outer).

- The character takes steps to reach the goal.

- The character encounters obstacles on their way to reaching the goal (Rising Action).

- Obstacles force the character to work harder to meet the goal.

- Obstacles get worse; the character works even harder to overcome them.

- At the climax of the story, the character either . . .


- Achieves the goal completely.

- Fails completely.

- Succeeds or fails partially.

- Succeeds or fails in an unexpected way.

- Denouement or Falling Action. (This is where the final loose ends of a story are tied up.)

As I said earlier, some writers find this technique to be limiting, resulting in fiction that's too predictable. If you've never used Classic Plot Design before, though, give it a shot and see how it works for you. The first few times you use it, you can be very methodical and outline every story beat, but eventually you'll internalize the pattern and find your own way to use it. Hopefully, it won't feel so mechanical to you then.

Plotting using Scene and Sequel. 

When I was in my late twenties, I started going to cons. The first one I went to was Context in Columbus, Ohio, where I was living at the time. I went to every panel I could and listened to the different authors speak on whatever topic the panel was focused on. I learned a ton during that con, but one of the things I noticed was that a lot of the writers kept recommending a book called Techniques of the Selling Writer by Dwight V. Swain. They said that was the book that truly taught them to write fiction, giving them the techniques they needed to begin selling their fiction regularly to publishers. So when the con was over, I hurried to a local bookstore (there was no Amazon to buy books from yet) and found a copy. The writers at the con mentioned a specific technique Swain discusses in the book called Scene and Sequel. I'd never heard of it before, but as I read Swain’s book, I realized that Scene and Sequel was a technique that allowed writers to create tight, focused fiction. You can approach this technique mechanically, plotting out your stories step by step, but you can also employ this technique instinctively, especially after you've been using it for a while. I sometimes refer to this technique as being the keys to the kingdom if you want to write popular fiction of any kind. It really can make the difference between work that’s publishable and work that isn't. Or, for indie writers, work readers read and enjoy so much they'll buy your next book. One thing about Scene and Sequel. I didn't develop the technique or name it. If I had, I'd have tried to come up with different terms. As it is, you need to view Scene and Sequel differently than the way we usually use these terms in writing. (Hopefully, this will make more sense as we go.) Here's how Scene and Sequel works: Scene: This is when a character works toward achieving a sub-goal with an outcome that furthers the plot. Example:

- Background: Bob's main goal for an entire story is to win back his ex-wife. His sub-goal (or his first step, if you like) is to convince her to have dinner with him.

- Scene: Bob’s ex won’t return his calls or texts (we can't make it too easy on him), so he visits her at the office where she works— and where she's the boss—to ask her to dinner. She resists at first (again, we can't make things easy on poor Bob), so he’s forced to embarrass her in front of the other employees somehow, maybe by relating an incident from their marriage that would make her look foolish to the people she manages.

- She agrees to go, but now she's mad at Bob (again, we can't make things easy on him). Not exactly the most romantic of starts.

- A Sequel is a story unit. It's often short and written as part of another main story unit where a character processes what has occurred and plans the next move. (Bob wouldn't do this at the office. He'd do this some time after he left, hence why this Sequel wouldn’t be part of the story unit set at the office.)

- Sequel: Bob knows his ex-wife is mad at him. He ponders what to do—or better yet, discusses the issue with a frienc1—and decides to convince his ex to go for a walk after dinner. He'll take her by the apartment house where they first lived after they were married in the hope that it will rekindle some fond memories from the early days of their marriage.

- The Sequel leads directly into a new Scene. And since you know the next important story unit is the after-dinner walk, you can actually skip showing the dinner. You can begin the next scene with Bob and his ex on the sidewalk, walking and talking.

- Scene: Bob does convince his ex-wife to go for walk. She's glad dinner went well, and she thinks that maybe she and Bob can be friends after all (which isn't exactly the result Bob wanted. Again, we need to keep making things hard on him all the time). They walk by the spot where their old apartment house was, but when they get there, they find that it burned down years ago. The ex is convinced that it's an omen (their relationship is forever doomed), and Bob must now come up with a new tactic in his quest to win her back. Scenes and Sequels can form an unbroken, tight chain that shapes your story. Sequels can be deferred until later in a story if necessary. For example, in the marketplace scene in Raiders of the Lost Ark, Indiana Jones is so busy fighting and running to have time to process everything that occurs in this scene. (We'll discuss how to use Scene and Sequel to write action scenes in Chapter Eighteen: “Let Them Fight!"). So later, after all the action is over, Indy and his friends can discuss the various developments that occurred in the marketplace scene (dealing with several Sequels at once) and then plan their next move.

The Amazing Story Spiral. 

Throughout my years teaching creative writing, I've searched for techniques I can offer to help nonlinear plotters create their stories. I often show the movie Wander Boys in class as an example of a character-based plot that doesn't follow Classic Plot Design. Usually we watch the film and discuss how the various elements blend together, but one time after showing the movie in class, I was struggling to articulate a metaphor for how such stories were created, and I had—check this out, literary writers—an epiphany. In my mind, I saw a wheel with multiple spokes coming from a central hub, or more accurately, spokes which were leading TO a central hub. These spokes were different plot elements, the hub was the climax or ending point of a story, and the main character was represented by a spiral line which started on the outside of the wheel and continued circling toward the hub, touching the different spokes at various points along the way, and at each point the character engaged with the spoke in a different way that moved that section of the story forward. And thus the Amazing Story Spiral was born!
To create a Story Spiral, draw a circle in the middle of a piece of paper (or in the middle of your computer screen if you're using a drawing program of some sort). This is the climax or the end point of your story. Then decide on various main story elements and draw a line coming from the middle circle for each of those elements. Then, starting at the top of the circle, draw a spiral line representing your main character (MC) which progresses through the spokes, curving ever inward in a spiral until it reaches the middle circle. Then go through the spiral and pick points where your character intersects each spoke and decide what event/story/character development will take place at that point. You can write notes about those events on the spiral itself, or if you don't have room, on another piece of paper or Word document. When you're finished, you have an alternative outline you can use as you draft your story.

Graphic by Keith Minnion

I realized this pattern could work well to help nonlinear writers-and writers looking to break away from Classic Plot Design— so I introduced it to my students and we spent a class using the Story Spiral as a plotting exercise. Here are some of the things they discovered about the technique: You don't have to have your character progress through the spokes in lockstep fashion. Just because the spiral touches a spoke doesn’t mean you need to create a scene for that spoke right then. For example, in Jaws one of the story spokes would be the sheriff ’s conflict with the mayor over closing the beach because of the shark attacks. Since this isn't as important a story element as other spokes, the sheriff character only touches that spoke a couple times. Whereas, in jaws, the sheriff is going to intersect the spoke representing the shark many times.
Spokes can end before they reach the hub, or the climax of the story. Some plot elements are resolved before the story's end. For example, if one of the spokes represents a supporting character, and that character dies halfway through the story, that character’s spoke ends. You can create different spirals for different characters/viewpoints. You can use the same spokes, but the different characters will intersect them at different times and in different ways. (Using multiple spirals could be useful in plotting a novel.) You can use a Spiral to plot out a whole story, a chapter, or even a scene. The tightening of the spiral mirrors the rising action of Classic Plot Design, but it implies a sense that opposing forces are drawing closer and closer to the main character, which more accurately depicts how a character feels as the events of the story draw near a climax. So if Classic Plot Design hasn't worked for you, or if you simply would like to try an alternative plotting tool, give the Amazing
Story Spiral a try. Don't save the best for last. Many beginning horror authors end their stories with a culminating image. It's like the hoary old urban legend of The Hook. “And there, hanging from the car door handle, was the murderer’s hook hand!” (And all the seven-year-olds around the campfire shriek.) But one way to make your plots more original, and open up new directions for them, is to begin with a strong image/concept and build from there. Clive Barker's “The Body Politic“ is an excellent example of this. How many horror stories and movies have centered on the idea of the severed hand with a life of its own? Too many, and they usually end with the severed hand attacking someone in the name of vengeance. But Barker's story begins with the premise that hands—all hands: yours, mine, everyone else’s—have minds of their own, and they wish to be free of “the tyranny of the body.” All they need is a messiah to arise and lead them. My own story “Long Way Home" resulted when I drafted a tale that ended with the image of a rain of blood falling from the sky. I finished that story, but I decided to try using the image of blood rain a different way. I started another story, only this time, I began with the blood rain beginning to fall and continued from there to detail a demonic invasion and one mother's desperate attempts to protect her child. The second story was far superior to the first, and all because I finally remembered to take my own damn advice. (Don't get me wrong; I sold the first version, too. I just like “Long Way Home" better.) 

Use established story situations. 

The most common pattern—or story situation—in horror is Predator vs. Prey. A Bad Thing wants to kill/eat/possess/drive mad/transform, etc. a victim. It could very well be the first horror story pattern, the one our distant ancestors used when they told tales of friends and family who'd been caught and eaten by long-tooths. The second most common pattern is probably Investigation. The Bad Thing is at the center of a mystery, and the main character serves as an amateur detective, uncovering clues that may help him or her combat the darkness. There are a couple other common patterns in horror stories, and while there's nothing wrong with any of them, you don't want to keep repeating the same story patterns over and over in your fiction. Following is a short list of different situations that you can use to create your stories to keep them from falling into the same old horror ruts. You can also use more than one situation, especially in longer works like a novella or a novel. A more complete list of story situations appears in Appendix B at the back of this book.

- Chase

- Love

- Rescue

- Revenge

- Coming of age

- Discovery

- Quest for object

- Quest for truth

- Survival

- Escape

- Defense/protection

Techniques to complicate your plot. As I said earlier in the example about Bob, you never want to make things easy on your characters. Too many beginning writers plot their stories in a linear fashion. The character has a goal, the character successfully deals with obstacles on the way to obtaining that goal, the character succeeds, The End. The story proceeds in a straight line, and while the protagonist has obstacles to overcome, he or she always does so and the plot continues moving ever forward until it reaches its destination. But you can make your plots much more interesting by using some of the following complications. Have your characters work at cross purposes. Even if they share the same overall goal, they might have very different ideas how to go about achieving it. They also might have different agendas and at some point be working against one another. Too many stories from beginners have characters who all like each other, get along well, and cooperate easily throughout the course of the tale. Doing that will result in a dull, dry, lifeless story. Make things harder for your characters and you make the story more interesting for your readers.

Create Greater and varied obstacles. 

This technique is especially handy when plotting novels. If your characters are facing genetically engineered monsters, don't have them deal just with the beasties. Maybe the lab is located in a country with an unstable political situation and a coup occurs. Maybe both the new government and representatives of the old one want to get hold of the monsters for their own purposes. Maybe the monsters also carry a disease that could wipe out all life on Earth if they escape. Maybe one of the scientists who created the monsters is showing early signs of dementia, further complicating things. Maybe there's an earthquake, a flood, a series of Old Testament plagues . . . Whatever makes things harder for your characters is good. (Maybe not for them but for your readers.)

Reversal of fortune. 

I mentioned Raiders of the Lost Ark before. Indiana Jones is a perfect example of this technique in action. He has the greatest luck of any action-hero that's ever existed, coupled with the worst luck of any action—hero that's ever existed. His fortunes reverse as easily and often as the wind changes directions. As soon as he finds the Ark, Belloch and the Nazis take it from him. He succeeds in bringing the Ark to America, and instead of studying this incredibly powerful archeological find, the government hides it away in a vast warehouse. In a less cartoony story, you'd only have your characters experience a reversal of fortune—especially a big one-once or twice during the course of the tale. Otherwise, it's not believable.

Have a twist in the middle. 

I mentioned this technique in Chapter Eight: "Done to Death." Instead of having a plot twist at the end, where it can't do much to alter the course of the story, put your twist in the middle, where it can spin your story off into a surprising new direction. 

Sidetracks. 

This happens in quest fantasy all the time. Our heroes go in search of the magic sword, but somewhere along the way they're captured by hungry trolls that want to eat them. They must escape—not only to survive but so they can continue their quest. I'd say a great deal of the events that take place in an adventure story are sidetracks; otherwise, our heroes would travel straight to the Temple of the Holy Sword, grab it, then go find the Dark Lord and slay him. Sidetracks can make for effective and interesting subplots in novels, though there usually isn't room to use them in short fiction.

Wrong track. 

Beginners have their characters set out on a course of action, and it’s always the correct course. Sure, they may encounter problems along the way, but they're going the right way. But people make mistakes in real life all the time, and when we travel, we sometimes end up going the wrong way. Having your characters go the wrong way at one point in your story (whether this wrong way is a literal incorrect route of travel or a wrong way of trying to deal with a problem) can make your characters’ lives a lot harder and your audience’s reading experience so much better.

Plotting literary fiction. 

The divide between literary and genre fiction can be summed up thusly: literary fiction primarily focuses on character, while genre fiction focuses primarily on plot. Yes, I know you can think of a zillion exceptions. There are literary horror, fantasy, science fiction, and mystery stories. I'm not sure there are literary romance stories, since that genre depends heavily on specific plot elements—it must be a romance, there must be obstacles/conflicts during the course of the two main characters falling in love, and there must be a happy ending. A literary story that deals with romantic love wouldn't be considered a romance because it wouldn't use the expected tropes. The character/plot divide is a false one, and writers of all stripes would be better served not to worry about it and tell the best story they're capable of, focusing on and stressing whatever elements each particular story needs to be successful. Literary fiction focuses on character—getting to know a character, watching a character be revealed, watching a character be transformed in some small but profound way. Despite this focus, literary fiction tends toward emotional restraint and intellectual distance. It's a paradox. Literary fiction deals with the emotional life of humans but does so at arm's length. I sometimes wonder if that’s because it's written by intellectuals who struggle to understand their emotional sides. At times it almost seems as if they’re naturalists writing about animals they’re trying to understand. One quote I've heard about literary fiction (I can't remember the sources): “Literary fiction is about ordinary things happening to extraordinary people." (I take this to mean that the characters tend to be more intelligent and perceptive than normal; small events can move them and transform them profoundly.) A second quote: “If you want to write a literary story, write a first-person, present-tense story then cut off the beginning and ending.”
That's usually meant as a joke, but I think there’s some truth to it. Literary fiction eschews what its practitioners see as anything approaching what they view as simplistic, childish, pop-culture storytelling, and the basic linear pattern of Classic Plot Design is too formulaic for them. I think a pattern for a literary story might be better described as a spiral (as in our old friend the Amazing Story Spiral). At the center is the conflict/emotional core/theme of the story. The main character circles around this core, drawing ever closer to it bit by bit, until the character is forced to confront it. The moment of confrontation leads to an epiphany which changes the character in a profound way. This change is often not depicted “on screen” and is left up to the reader to ponder after the story is finished. Raymond Carver’s "Cathedral" is a good example of this spiral technique. If you haven't read it, google it. 

Character-centered plot. 

If the story is intended to focus on a character, then the purpose is for readers to get to know the character and gain insight into that character. Create the character first, then write detailed character notes. Look for aspects of a character's life that will show the character at his or her best and/or worst. Search for problems and crisis points. Use these problems and crisis points to develop a plot that reveals character through story action. Organizational patterns for either short stories or novels. You can allow your stories to develop organically and determine their own final shapes. But if you’re looking for specific techniques to organize a story—especially if you've fallen into a plotting rut and are looking to try something different—here are some different plotting methods you can try.

Chronological order. 

This is an obvious one, and as I said earlier, consider beginning close to the climax. Also, it's okay to skip stuff that's not important. You don't need to show your characters arguing for twenty minutes about where to go out to eat. You can just say: Jill and Sam argued for twenty minutes before finally deciding to get pizza. Or you can end a scene and begin the next one with Jill and Sam already at the restaurant eating pizza.

Flashbacks. 

These can be overused. If you're a beginning writer, I'd suggest keeping them to a bare minimum or leaving them out entirely. But one or two in a short story can be a good way to present exposition in a dramatic way instead of through dry narration.

Alternating time-frames. 

I've used. this technique a lot over the years, especially in short fiction. I'll have a present-day story that alternates with a past story featuring the same main character which provides insight into the present-day story. Sometimes the pattern will be fifty percent Present and fifty percent Past, and sometimes it’s more like seventy-five percent Present and twenty-five percent past. Whatever seems to work best. 

Snapshot technique. 

If your story covers a long time period, you can't cover every moment. So instead, choose several key moments of the story to dramatize in detail. It's like pictures in a photo album. The album might be labeled Christmas 2019, but it doesn't have pictures of every single moment of how you celebrated the holiday. There might be ten photos that, taken together, create a collage that communicates what the overall experience was like. At a guess, I'd say you might have anywhere from three to five scenes like that in a short story written in this manner. The social melodrama (or the King Pattern). In his introduction to Thomas Tessier’s collection World of Hurt and Other Selected Stories, John Langan discusses the most common basic plot structure of horror novels during the horror boom of the 1980's. Dubbed the “social melodrama" by Dale Bailey, this pattern is “a story whose large cast of characters is drawn from different socioeconomic strata, and which occurs in a naturalistic setting rendered mimetically, and which concerns a growing supernatural threat to the established social order, and which concludes with the threat vanquished and the social order reaffirmed." Some examples Langan provides are Ghost Story by Peter Straub, Swan Song by Robert McCammon, and Carrion Comfort by Dan Simmons. I'd add that most of Stephen King's output falls into this category. In fact, I'd say you could call this story structure the King Pattern because even if he didn't invent it, he's the best-known and most-influential writer in the field to use it. If you’re looking for a tried-and-true foundational genre plot for writing horror, this pattern is it. Literary writers prefer to avoid formulas like this—and many outright despise them—but readers who seek primarily to be entertained by horror respond well to it. This is no surprise. Novels in other genres such as romance, mystery, fantasy, science fiction, and thrillers have their own basic story structures that readers enjoy and never seem to get tired of. Humans respond well to patterns—it’s one of the primary ways we make sense of the world—and common shared patterns are what make a novel a genre novel. The social melodrama pattern is a conservative one. Not in a political sense, but in a traditional, safe, if-it-ain’t-broke-don't-fix-it way. Its biggest drawback is that it’s known, and I've mentioned before how once a particular story element is known in horror it can lose its effectiveness. But if you want to attempt to reach the largest audience possible, the King Pattern might work well for you.

Tips for writing a monster story. 

I've written three monsters-eating-people books—Teeth of the Sea, Blood Island (both from Severed Press), and Alien: Prototype. If you want to write a lyrical, character-centered story with deep themes that speak to what it means to be a human being struggling to make sense of life in the twenty-first century . . . a monster story probably isn’t the best way to go. But if you’d like to write about people getting eaten by big things with sharp teeth, I've got you covered! (And I'd argue that any story with a Bad Thing—monster, human, or supernatural force—that serves the function as predator in any way can benefit from using the techniques in this section.) Here are some tips for writing good monster stories: A monster is only a monster when someone perceives it as a monster. Imagine a monster wandering around in a field by itself. It's not a monster. It's just a creature hanging out, not bothering anybody. It only becomes a monster when a human is there to perceive it as such. It's characters who make a monster a monster. Without them, without how they react to the monster, there's no story. Alternately, imagine a tornado. If one appears and moves across a desolate plain, never encountering humans, animals, or damaging any property, it's a non-event. A tornado is only a disaster when it impacts people. How people react to the disaster is the story, not the disaster itself. Same deal with monsters. Remember Jareth the Goblin King in Labyrinth? At the end, he tells the main character, Sarah, that he’s exhausted from living up to her expectations of him. She needed a villain for her journey, and Jareth played that role for her. It's a very meta moment, but it speaks to a truth about writing stories. Villains (threats, problems, conflict, even mundane troubles as in non-genre fiction) exist to give your characters something to do. The conflict is the motivating force in a story. 

Use a large cast. 

If you have only two characters in your story—and it's a novel—your monster probably won't get to do very much during the course of the tale. Monsters need people to kill (or possess, or transform into monsters, etc.). You need a number of characters whose ultimate function is to up the body count and increase the suspense and the stakes for your heroes as the story progresses. But as I've said before, you still need to respect all of your characters, even if they are basically sacrificial lambs. To that end. . . 

Give the humans—even the ones who are going to get eaten—character arcs (if only small ones) separate from dealing with the monster. 

Your characters are busy living their lives when the monster comes along to interrupt (and possibly end) those lives. Maybe the characters can't continue to deal with their own problems and try to reach their goals while trying to survive a monster encounter, but that doesn't mean their problems leave their minds. And their problems may have an impact on how they respond to the monster—especially if they have problems with others who are also dealing with the monster. An excellent example of this, which I mentioned in a previous chapter, is Stephen King's story “Lunch at the Gotham Cafe." Giving each character—even the ones who are only on stage for a short time before getting killed during their time in the spotlight—grants them a measure of dignity. They aren't just nameless, faceless nobodies whose only purpose is to die. They are, if only for a brief moment in your story, real people who are going to experience real loss—maybe even the ultimate loss. It’s important how your characters react to the monster, but it's just as important that we understand who they are and what the monster is going to take from them, as well as the impact that loss will have on others. 

Give characters different reactions to your monster. 

If all your characters react the same way to your monster, your story will be boring and repetitive. Each character should react in a way that's specific to their personality. Remember what I said in an earlier chapter about creating characters? The most important thing to know about them is how they respond to conflict, problems, danger, stress, setbacks, failure—their responses tell you what they will do in any given situation, and that, in turn, gives your story its shape. Give your characters different responses to your monster, and you'll have a richer, more involving story.

Make your monster unique (or at least interesting). 

The great white in jaws isn't a normal shark. It's much bigger than normal, and its behavior is atypical. It has almost supernatural abilities. For example, it can stay submerged even though it has a number of flotation devices attached to it that should slow it down and keep it at the surface. And why does it even attack the Orca in the first place? A normal shark would be off looking for food, not responding to a challenge from a trio of men hunting it. In Deep Blue Sea, the sharks have been genetically engineered to be intelligent, and they're housed in an underwater research facility which they've caused to be flooded so they can escape to the surface. So not only are they unusual, the environment in which the humans must battle them is also unusual. In The Meg, the shark is a gigantic prehistoric version of a great white. In The Ghost and the Darkness (which I’ve mentioned before), two male lions are preying on workers building a railroad in Africa. Lions don't typically attack humans, and there are hints that nature is working through the lions to attack the forces of civilization encroaching upon it. Simply making your monster a giant—or more bloodthirsty than normal—version of a natural creature isn't enough to make your story stand out from the pack. Try to find a way to put your own unique spin on it. In Teeth of the Sea, the monsters I used were pliodons, ancient sea dinosaurs. To make the story different than the run of the mill, I set my tale on the island of Las Dagas (Spanish for the daggers, a reference to the pliodons’ teeth), where a luxury resort has been built with canals crisscrossing the island, giving my beasties greater access to my human characters. I also did a Gargo and had the main monsters be juveniles while their parents, who remained offshore, were much larger. In Blood Island, I created the Mass: a prehistoric creature formed of living blood cells that uses other animals—in this case bull sharks—as puppets to catch food which the Mass absorbs. And when the Mass absorbs a human with a strong personality, her brain melds with the Mass, giving it intelligence, making the creature far more dangerous. In Alien: Prototype, my Xenomorph is born from a human host that was once infected with a deadly disease. The Xenomorph incorporates this disease into its genetic makeup and becomes a very different kind of monster than a usual specimen of its kind.

Give the monster its own arc. 

In Teeth of the Sea, the pliodons return to Las Dagas every decade to mate and lay eggs. There are two mated pairs, which, along with the two larger pliodons offshore, form a single pod. There’s a struggle for dominance in the pod as the story progresses. And of course, the pliodons have to deal with the pesky (but delicious) humans that have built a resort on their spawning grounds since the last time they were there. In Blood Island, a movie crew is filming a low-budget monster movie in a small Texas coastal town. The human the Mass absorbs is the film's cynical producer. The Mass now not only has intelligence to draw on, it has imagination, and it decides to make a real-life monster "movie," using the cast and crew as well as the town's citizens as victims. In Alien: Prototype, my Xenomorph has two simple but intertwined goals: to reproduce and create others of its kind, and to spread the disease it now carries. Give your monsters their own story, even if it's a basic one, that goes beyond “Get in my belly, soft-skin!” 

Write some scenes from the monster’s point of view. 

Presenting some scenes from the monster’s viewpoint is a good way to build suspense. You can let readers know what your monster is doing when the characters are completely clueless. That way, readers can anticipate the slaughter to come. In both Teeth of the Sea and Alien: Prototype, the monsters aren’t intelligent or even all that self-aware, so when I wrote scenes from their point of view, I used an omniscient third person viewpoint, and instead of focusing on what my monsters were thinking (since they didn't think) I focused on what they did, on what stimuli prompted them to act (smells, sounds, sights), and on what instincts drove them to certain actions. I also did this for the first part of Blood Island, but once the Mass became sentient, I could write about it with a close third-person point of view. 

Try to make your plot more complex and surprising than “Monster eats a lot of people and then is defeated by surviving humans." 

Sure, your basic underlying plot may be exactly that, but you need to dress it up and make it seem different than other similar stories. In a lot of ways, monsters—eating-people stories are like romance novels. There‘s a basic underlying plot—two people meet, fall in love, etc.—but you can tell a million different stories using this basic plot as a spine for your story, and you can do the same thing with a monsters-eating-people tale. Different characters in different situations, in different settings, facing different monsters, and encountering different additional challenges. For example, a hurricane blows in while the monster is attacking, or one of the characters will die if he or she doesn't get medical treatment, and so the other characters have to defeat the monster to save their friend’s life. Also, when you're plotting your story, don’t go with a clichéd idea (this is true no matter what kind of story you're writing). Ask yourself what couldn't possibly happen in your story at this moment, and then make it happen. Maybe the character that needs medical attention is faking it for some reason, and the others risk their lives to get him or her to a hospital without realizing until too late that they've been tricked. If your plot surprises you—even if it rests on a familiar spine—it will surprise your readers, too.

Less is more with a monster. 

Horror—even action-adventure horror—depends on a sense of the unknown. The more you show your monster during your story—the more known it becomes—the less impact it will have. Don't wait until the last few pages of your novel to reveal your monster, though. That's a good way to get hate e-mail from readers! Try to spread out your monster‘s appearances, and try to vary them, making some appearances short and some longer. Save the longer ones for pivotal points in the story, and use the shorter ones to foreshadow events and increase suspense. You want your readers to crave more of your monster, not get bored and think, When the hell are these people finally going ta kill this damn thing? If you're not sure how to do this, pick several monster-eating-people books or films you like and analyze them to determine how much “stage time" the monster gets compared to the total length of the book or film. This will give you an idea of how many monster scenes to write in your story. 

Monsters stories should be like monster movies—fast-paced, full of action, and fun. 

Monster stories are effective on a primal level because they're the most common (and simple) type of horror story: predator hunts prey. They already strike a profound chord in humans. They don‘t need to be serious for them to be effective (look at the Tremors series of films.) And really, they're silly stories. Childhood demons come to life. The Boogeyman (wearing a shark or giant lizard suit) is coming to get you! People read these stories and watch these films for childlike (not childish) fun, and a fast-paced story with action is exactly what they're looking for. That doesn't mean you have to give it to them, of course. There's plenty of room for slower-paced, atmospheric, somber monster tales. Adam Nevil‘s novel The Ritual is a good example, as is the movie The Last Winter. I love both of them, but they don't give me the same childlike glee as when I watch a Godzilla film. Write the kind of monster story you want, but if you want people to have a blast while reading your story, I suggest leaning into the pulpier aspects of the genre and having a good time yourself. The fun you had writing your story will be passed on to your readers. 

Remember, people are getting killed, injured, and traumatized in your story. 

No matter how much fun your monster story is, regardless of whether it’s light as a souffle or filled with pitch-black humor, people get hurt in these stories. They experience physical and emotional pain. They may die, leaving behind grief-stricken survivors, and those selfsame survivors might experience long-term trauma. You don't need to wallow in the realities of what monster carnage would truly be like, but you don't want to dismiss those realities altogether, either. It can be a fine balancing act, but it's an important one, I think, and for all good horror fiction, not just monster stories. Treating violence, emotional trauma, and death seriously also raises the threat-level for your characters, increases the stakes for them, and amps up the suspense for your readers. Violence is a storytelling tool, but I think it's one that we should wield like a scalpel—carefully and with intent—rather than like a sledgehammer, just bashing away for the hell of it. 

Hopefully, I've given you some things to think about when writing your next monster tale. And if you’ve never tried to write one before, go for it. They’re a hell of a lot of fun!

EXERCISES

1. 

Use standard plot design to outline a story, then outline a different story using the spiral technique. Did you notice any differences in how the two stories turned out? Did one technique result in a better story than the other? Which technique felt easier and more natural to use?

2. 

Select three story situations from the list in Appendix B. Choose ones you've never used before. Make notes on how you'd tell a horror story using these situations. Pick whichever one you think will be most successful and develop it into an entire story. How did it turn out? How did using a different story situation affect your writing of the story?

3. 

Again, choose three story situations from Appendix B. Makes notes on how you’d incorporate all three to make a novel. Would this novel be different from what you usually write? Better or worse? Why?

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give to a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Joe Hill, bestselling author of Full Throttle

1.

Good horror is, perhaps counter-intuitively, about empathy. When horror succeeds, it's because the writer gave us a character to root for, to invest in, and to love. Then, when that character is faced with the worst—the fatal infection, the man with the mask made of human skin—we're rooting for her to somehow impossibly defy her fate and survive. To make it through.  Without a character to care about, horror often devolves into bloody slapstick: the Three Stooges with flying entrails. That can be entertaining too, but it's not horror as I understand it.

2.

Any suggestions I might make about craft aren't very genre specific. I try to get my characters talking, so I can find out who they are and what they want. I often write pages of dialogue in first draft that never make it into the final book. I write that stuff for me, looking for someone to give a damn about, someone who might be interesting to hang out with for another 30 or 40 or 400 pages. The other thing, I never sit down to write a book, or a comic, or a short story. That’s too overwhelming. When I dig into a day of work, I'm just looking to write one good scene. Or I think even smaller: I get focused on writing one decent sentence, the shorter the better. Many a good day of work has started with a deathless line like: “Insects hummed."

Gaby Triana, author of the Haunted Florida series

1.

Good horror begins with compelling characters rather than a scary situation, since fear is a subjective experience. Once you know these characters inside and out, what makes them tick, what shadow sides they're unable or unwilling to face, then the rest of the story basically writes itself, as it unfolds directly from those fears. Also, I like my horror atmospheric and moody, with lots of classic elements: ghosts, candles that snuff out by themselves, dusty bookshelves, and staircases. Lots of staircases.

2. 

Know your monsters. Don't try to write another author's monsters. The audience that enjoys your particular brand of weirdness, gothic-ness, or love of Victorian cryptids will find you. When that happens, you become effective just by finding your tribe, and isn't that what good writing is about, creating a special connection with readers that's unique? 

Michael Knost, award-winning author of Return of the Mothman

1. 

I think it's the human element. Without the human element, the monster—or the horrific aspects of the story—are mere props in a timeline. It's all about eliciting an emotional response from the character, which will hopefully elicit an emotional response from the reader. Merriam-Webster defines horror as “painful and intense fear, dread, or dismay.” It has nothing to do with the size of the teeth or claws—it has everything to do with the depth of the character.

2. 

Keeping in line with my response to what makes good horror, I think the best advice for horror writers would be to focus more on developing characters rather than developing monsters or horrific elements. Remember, the more layers we know about the character, whether the layers be weaknesses, struggles, or issues, the better we can customize the very elements that we hope will elicit an emotional response with fear or dread or dismay.

Lee Thomas, two-time Lambda Literary Award-winning and Bram Stoker Award-winning author

1. 

In the broadest sense, it's the offspring of normalcy and wonder. Something wondrous penetrates the "normal" world, and often enough that wonder is comprised of a dark origin or intent. It wraps itself around characters that engage us, and we experience a sense of dread through the connection we feel for those characters.

2.

Take time to develop your characters. Make their reactions and choices feel authentic. An imaginative and otherwise great story can be completely derailed by dull characters, or characters behaving illogically. It's always about the characters for me, because ghosts can haunt a house for centuries, vampires can fill the sky, and zombies can shamble from desert to glacier, but it's only when these creatures go after strong characters that true horror emerges.

CHAPTER FIPTEEN

THE DARK HEART OF HORROR

Aspiring writers are forever searching for The Secret: the single trick or technique that will elevate their writing from promising to publishable. Old pros say there is no secret to getting published, that it's simply the result of hard work—reading a lot, writing a lot, getting feedback on your work, learning how to market your work, etc.—and I wouldn’t dispute that. But there is one element missing all too often from beginners’ fiction. I'd argue that it’s one of the most important aspects of creating successful, compelling stories, and it's as close to The Secret as anyone is likely to get: writing with an emotional core. Successful stories should entertain, stimulate the imagination, and provide an artistic experience, but they also need to move readers emotionally. At the heart of a story—and there's a reason we call it the heart—should lie a strong emotional core. It is, in a very real sense, what a story is ultimately about. For example, on the surface the movie Back to the Future appears to be about a teenager who goes back in time and prevents his parents‘ meeting, thereby endangering his own existence. He needs to get his parents together, save himself, and then return to his own time. That’s the premise and basic plot of the film. But the emotional core of the film—why it moves audiences is Marty McFly‘s relationship with his parents and with Doc Brown. He gets to know his parents as teenagers like himself, gaining a new perspective on them. He feels connected to them as a family despite the gulf in years, and because he loves them, he can't stop himself from trying to make their lives better in the past, even at the risk of altering the future in potentially disastrous ways. It's the same for Doc. Marty loves him, and he can't stand the idea of Doc getting killed in the future, so he tries to prevent it, despite Doc's wishes. Simply put, the emotional core of the movie is love of family. Without this core, the movie might’ve been a fun adventure, but it wouldn't be the much-loved classic it is today. The emotional core is what connects an audience to a story; it's what makes a story matter to them. Here are some things to think about in order to strengthen the emotional core in your stories. What is the main emotional relationship/connection between characters in the story? In Silence of the Lambs, the main emotional relationship is between Hannibal Lector and Clarice Starling, between predator and potential prey or, if you prefer, between wild animal and hunter. Starling wants to use Lector to catch another killer, and Lector wants to use Starling to amuse himself and escape confinement. But the power dynamic between the two constantly shifts, and it's unclear to the audience, as well as to the characters themselves, how they feel about each other and their roles. This ever-shifting unease-will Starling remain uncorrupted by Lector? can Starling's inherent goodness, if not redeem him, reveal that he at least possesses some small measure of humanity?-is the true mystery that powers the story. And just like Back to the Future, it's the emotional core that makes this story a classic, elevating it above a run-of-the-mill thriller. So consider the characters in your story and decide what connects them. This doesn't mean they have to have a positive relationship. Ahab’s relationship to Moby Dick isn't exactly warm and fuzzy. Once you firm up the emotional relationship between the characters4once you've created a strong emotional core—then you can use that relationship as a foundation upon which the rest of your story rests. Or perhaps more accurately, as the seed from which your story will grow. How is the emotional core reflected in the plot? In jaws, the emotional core is Sheriff Brody’s need to protect the people in his community. This creates conflict in the story because while Brody wants to keep people from being eaten by the shark, he always has a duty to protect the town's economy, and the town depends on the money the summer people pump into it every year. If Brody closes the beaches, he kills the town. If he doesn't close the beaches, more people will die. Brody is trapped in an impossible situation. He cannot protect everyone in every way. He must choose. (Just to be clear, this economic aspect of the story is more prevalent in the novel than in the film.)
In my novel The Mouth of the Dark, a middle-aged man's twenty-year-old daughter is missing. The emotional core comes from his need to find her because he believes he's failed her too many times in the past, and he‘s determined not to fail her again—no matter what. Everything in the plot revolves around this need, and the character does things he would ordinarily never think of doing in order to find his daughter. In acting, this is called motivation, but when it comes to creating a story, the emotional core doesn’t just motivate your character, it motivates the story’s events as well. Write the emotional core of your story at the top of a piece of paper or Word document and list all the ways the core could be expressed in terms of plot events. If you have a plot event that doesn't relate somehow to the core—especially for a short story—don't include it when drafting. How is the emotional core reflected in the setting? In both Moby Dick and jaws, the sea is the most important part of the setting. Ahab wants revenge and Brody wants to protect his town, but both of those motivations lead these characters to try to control the object of their respective hunts. But the sea is uncontrollable. It's wild and dangerous, and it conceals rather than reveals. Struggling against it during the hunt will test each man and show what lengths he will go to, and what he’s willing to sacrifice, to find and kill his quarry. In The Wizard of Oz, the land of Oz appears on the surface to be a beautiful, magical world, a place a little girl (in the book) or a young woman (in the film) would love to remain in forever—especially when she compares it to life in boring Dust Bowl-era Kansas. But Oz is a confusing, dangerous place of Wicked Witches, deceitful (if ultimately kind-hearted) wizards, Tin Woodsmen created by mechanically replacing the lost body parts of a human man (read the book), creepy-as-hell flying monkeys, and other bizarre elements. It's no wonder that Dorothy ultimately decides that the emotional core of the story—There’s no place like home—is a better choice than remaining in a beautiful but chaotic magical land. Again, write down your emotional core and list all the ways your setting can reflect that core. Is the emotional core of your story Isolation? Think of all the ways your characters could be isolated, both the obvious and not-so-obvious ways. Is the emotional core of your story Sticking by a Friend No Matter What? Think of all the ways your protagonist could be challenged by the setting to continue sticking by his or her friend. For example, two characters are lost in the wilderness and one has a broken leg. What would make it difficult—maybe almost impossible—for the uninjured friend to remain with the injured one, despite his or her resolve to do so? Lack of food and water? Weather? Wolves? How is the emotional core reflected in the theme? First, a word about theme. Some writers make conscious decisions about theme while others don’t worry about it. If a theme happens to emerge while they’re writing, great. If not, no big deal. The important thing is to tell the story as well as you can. But I'd argue that an emotional core is the theme, at least with a little tweaking. Ahab wants revenge against Moby Dick, but he can never get revenge. The whale has no idea he hurt Ahab and nothing Ahab could do to him, including killing him, would ever make the whale sorry for what he did. Nor would it ever make him realize that Ahab was the one who killed him. So Ahab can never have the revenge he seeks, and thus the theme: Revenge is ultimately impossible and only leads to self-destruction. In Back to the Future, Marty's love for Doc and his family leads to that story's theme: Family connections transcend Time, and these connections define us, bind us, and in the end, might even save us. Thinking about how the emotional core of your story can grow into a theme allows you to return to the story-to the characters, the plot, the setting—and strengthen the theme, making your story tighter, more focused, and ultimately more impactful for the audience.
How does the emotional core serve as a counterpoint to the plot and setting, and vice versa? The emotional core, plot, and setting don’t have to complement each other. They can serve as counterpoints. A simple example would be a scene depicting a graveside funeral service. The emotional core is sorrow. The clichéd impact of the emotional core on the setting: a gloomy, rainy day. Counterpoint: a sunny day that seems at odds with the emotions the characters are feeling, or a pleasant but bland day weather-wise, as if nothing important is happening when, for the family, something extremely important is taking place: saying a final farewell to their loved one. By playing against the emotional core with the setting, you can actually intensify it. In the movie Poltergeist, the emotional core is the fear that your family isn't safe even in their own home. Once the paranormal events in the house increase to a certain point, the family wants to get the hell out of there. The fear should drive them out, but little Carol Anne becomes trapped in a dark dimension adjacent to our world, a dimension only accessible through the house, so the parents must stay. (They're good parents, though, so they send Carol Anne's older sister away rather than risk losing her, too.) Plot- wise, the characters are forced to do the opposite of what they want to do, what the story's emotional core is driving them to do, It's the plotting power of emotional core counterpoint at its finest. Each scene can have its own emotional core. So far, I've been talking about emotional cores that serve as the center of entire stories. But each scene can have its own emotional core, one that may or may not be strongly tied into the overall emotional core. The example of the funeral service I used above can also serve as an example here. Sorrow might be the emotional core of such a scene, while struggling to maintain a marriage in the face of tragedy—such as the loss of a child—might be the overarching emotional core for the whole story. Adding emotional cores to your scenes will make each one of them have an impact on your audience, and they'll build one upon the other, increasing people's emotional investment in your story as it progresses toward its climax.
Emotional cores in short stories versus long stories. Short stories need to be tighter and more focused than novels. (Tell us something we don't know, Tim!) Because of this, you'll likely have an important emotional relationship between two characters and no more. There simply isn't room to develop multiple expressions of the emotional core in a short story. So if your short story is about an elderly man mourning the death of his beloved dog—a man who can connect with animals but who has trouble connecting with people—you won't show multiple people trying to console him and reach out to him emotionally, as you could do in a novel. You'll have only one person fulfill this role. His estranged son. The widow who lives down the street. A neighbor he's never gotten along with but who understands the grief over losing a pet. Two main characters, one emotional core. That's about all a short story can handle.
A novel, however, is a different matter. If you want to write a novel about the elderly man who’s lost his dog, you can have all of the above characters be a part of it, and you can explore the emotional core on multiple levels and in multiple ways. Some writers claim that there are short story ideas and there are novel ideas, and the two aren't interchangeable. While there might be some truth to this, you can often turn a short story idea into a novel idea—and the other way around—by expanding or narrowing the emotional core. By doing so, I could write about the elderly man at any length and complexity—and so could you. Which should come first when drafting? The character, the plot, or the emotional core? Short answer: It doesn't matter so long as everything is in its place when the story is finished and ready to submit to an editor. I suggest starting wherever you feel the most creative energy and potential with a given story. If you're really into the characters, start with them first. If you have an awesome idea for a story, but you're not sure of anything else, work out the idea in detail and add other elements later. If you're a planner, make decisions about your story's emotional core before you begin drafting. If you prefer to write by the seat of your pants, start writing and work on firming up the emotional core in revisions. How you tend to the emotional core doesn't matter. I'd argue that since the emotional core serves as a foundation for your story, the sooner you tend to it, the better, but the most important thing is that you do tend to it before you type The End. Regardless of what kind of fiction you write—entertainment-focused, literary, genre-oriented, experimental, or some blend of these—make sure to write it with a strong emotional core. By doing so you'll not only produce stories that readers will love, but stories they'll remember long after they finish reading. Stories that change them, that make a difference in their lives. Stories that matter. And in the end, aren't those the kind of stories we all want to read and write?

EXERCISES

1. 

Pick a story or novel from a horror writer whose work you admire. What’s the emotional core that lies at the heart of this story? Express the emotional core as a single sentence. If there isn't an emotional core, do you think the story would be more successful if it had one? If the story does have an emotional core, do you think it could’ve been stronger? If so, what would've made it stronger?

2. 

Pick a novel from a horror writer. Go through a couple chapters and identify the emotional core of each scene in those chapters. How were these emotional elements expressed? Did the author express them effectively or could they have been expressed better? If so, how?

3. 

Take one of your stories and go through it. What's the emotional core of the piece as a whole? What's the emotional core of each scene? Can the story's overall emotional core and each scene's individual emotional core be strengthened? If so, how? 

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1. 

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give to a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Lucy Taylor, award-winning author of Spree and Other Stories

1. 

For me, good horror blends so seamlessly into normal life that by the time it fully reveals itself, the reader feels “Yes, this is how it would be. This could happen to anyone, even to me!" In other words, it's portraying horror not as something external, but also internal in a disturbingly intimate way. It’s not just glimpsing the demon in someone else’s eyes, but sensing its proximity everywhere—in the beat of your blood, in your bones, in your soul.

2. 

I’d say it's important to explore your own private fears, hatreds, perversions, and lusts with unflinching courage and non-judgmental curiosity. Search around in your mind's dark attic where you store what no one else is supposed to see and you may not even know about yourself. Use what you find. Never turn away from the horror residing within you, because it's from there your fiction will burst forth, perhaps ripping out a little piece of you with it. 

Hunter Shea, author of Slash

1. 

Over the past five decades, I’ve seen and read it all—the good, the bad and the fugly. It used to be that I enjoyed it all, too, but I've gotten a bit pickier over the years. Good horror in fiction needs rounded, sympathetic characters. It's not about the ghost or the monster or the killer. Well, not just about them. You need someone your readers can root for or against. If you can't feel them as a character, you can't feel their fear. Look, it's easy to write scenes of carnage and gore. What makes good horror stand out from the rest is how the characters draw you in. You want to run alongside them, share their success when they turn the table on the killer or feel their pain when they zigged when they should have zagged. Good horror takes chances. It drags something new from the dark into the light. Good horror finds an angle on an old trope you’d never considered before. Most of all, it hits you right in the emotions, a real sucker punch to the ol’ chakras.

2. 

Take more time developing your protagonists than your antagonist(s). What makes them uniquely strong? What are their weaknesses? Is this a chance to overcome their shortcomings or succumb to some past sin? Don't be afraid to take chances with your story. Horror is about crushing boundaries. Write something that you would want to read, not what you think others want to read. You're going to have to live with the book way longer than a person who reads it. Make sure it's something you want to share your life with for a good chunk of time. Last but not least, read a ton of horror. You’ll learn as much from the bad as you will from the good.

P.D. Cacek, award-winning author of Second Lives

1. 

I think it has to be something people can relate to, some ordinary event or smell or sound that gets turned 180-degrees. For example: most people have heard leaves rustling in the wind, but what if there is no wind and no leaves and you hear the sound outside your closed bedroom door in the middle of the night?

2. 

Read. Read what scares you and then analyze it. Why did it scare me? What was it that got me? Why am I sleeping with the lights on? And how can I do this to others?

Kathryn Ptacek, author of Looking Backward in Darkness

1.

I think the answer to that is: Whatever keeps you, the reader, turning the page, be it a paper one or a digital one. Sometimes, you might guess the ending long before reaching that point, but if you get so engrossed in the story and the characters that you have to finish the novel or story, no matter what, then that's totally successful dark writing. I also think that you have to have sympathetic characters. No one wants to read 500 or more pages about someone they hate. Well, I don't. Make us like your characters in some way, and we, as readers, will follow their journey.

2.

Best advice? Read everything in the field—old stuff, new stuff, terrible stuff, excellent stuff. Don't just read novels or stories from the last ten years. New writers need to get a thorough perspective of the field, and that includes reading everything from Victorian times on. And then don't confine yourself to reading in just the field. Read mysteries, romance, westerns, suspense, fantasy, science fiction, nonfiction. When you’re a writer, nothing you read EVER goes to waste.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

A MATTER OF STYLE

You can't talk about writing horror—or writing anything, for that matter—without talking about style (well, maybe you can, but I can't). The way a story is presented to the reader is as important as the story itself. Maybe more so. Two different writers can take the same basic idea or even the same detailed outline of a story and deliver radically different versions of it. The difference will be in how they tell it. That's style. Long, evocatively written passages filled with striking imagery. Short, staccato-like words and sentences that hit like machine-gun rounds. Lyrical stories that take their time to get where they're going, wandering off the trail whenever some pretty-shiny catches the writer's attention. Fast-paced, hard-driving narratives that surge forward at lightning speed, never giving you a chance to catch your breath. Since everything in a piece of fiction is affected by style or is a part of it, we've already discussed a lot about style in the preceding chapters (and we'll talk some more about it in the chapters after this one). I don’t want to rehash ground we've already covered—or prehash ground we've yet to talk about—so for this chapter, I thought we could discuss a few matters of style not covered elsewhere in the book (with one small exception toward the end of this chapter). First off, writing fiction on multiple levels. Multilevel fiction. Humans experience reality as a bombardment of constantly changing multiple stimuli that our conscious and subconscious minds constantly sift through in order to determine what's important—and what isn't—at any given moment, in order to tell us what we need to pay attention to and what we can ignore. Put simply, a hell of a lot is going on inside and outside us all the time. Simulating this experience in your fiction is what gives it verisimilitude—the appearance of being real. Writing multilevel fiction overlaps writing with an immersive point of view, which we've discussed before, but multilevel fiction is more about the layered structure of your story. Whenever I discuss this concept in class or a workshop, I show a PowerPoint slide with a picture of a cake that has a piece cut out. There are six or seven layers, each a different color. Each scene in your fiction should function on multiple levels at a time. Most beginners‘ fiction functions on only a couple levels (if that), but if you want to create truly effective fiction—whether your goals are literary, entertainment-focused, or somewhere in between—making sure your cake has all the right levels is vital. So let's talk about them. Each scene in a story or novel should accomplish multiple goals. Ask yourself these questions:

- What's the current action in this scene? What happens?

- What's the conflict in this scene?

- What are the character interactions in this scene?

- How is the main character developed in this scene?

- What's the emotional focus of this scene?

- How does this scene further the larger story?

- What exposition (background information) does this scene add to the story?

- How does this scene increase the suspense and deepen the mystery of the larger story?

- How do all of these elements work together to move the larger story forward? If the scene starts at Point A, where does it end up at?

Each scene you write needs to answer all of these questions. Now, not all of these layers are developed in the same detail in each scene, and some may not be possible to include. For example, your character can't interact with others if he or she is alone. The action in a scene may be very mild—say, someone going out for a cup of coffee. But during the drive, your character sees his or her abusive uncle walking down the sidewalk—an uncle who died five years ago. The emotional core of that scene is huge, as is the way it deepens the mystery of the story and furthers the overall plot. But the action? Your character is driving to the coffee shop and passes what seems to be a ghost. That's it. You can approach a technique like this a couple ways. You can consciously use it to plan a scene, making sure as many levels on the list as possible are included in some fashion, then write the scene. If you find such an approach too restrictive, write the scene -or write the entire story or novel—without worrying about the list, and then use it when you're going back through and revising. The Sweet Spot. I often find it difficult to articulate to students exactly what makes good fiction. There are stories and novels that many of us agree are good, even great. We know ‘em when we see ’em, but just because we can recognize good fiction doesn't mean we can automatically produce it, any more than we can listen to a highly talented and well-trained singer perform and then instantly sing as well ourselves. I’m always searching for new ways to express the fundamental concepts of fiction writing—both to help my students and to further my own understanding of the craft. Sometimes an insight will come to me during a class I’m teaching. But other times ideas come to me as a sudden burst of inspiration, like when Doc Brown first visualized the flux capacitor (although I've never needed to crack my head on the edge of a sink to get ideas). I came up with the idea for the Sweet Spot this way. It popped into my head as a complete Venn diagram, labels and all, and I grabbed a piece of paper and drew it. In fine absent-minded professor tradition, I quickly lost the drawing and forgot that I'd ever visualized the Sweet Spot. Months passed, and one day my wife found my hastily drawn diagram while working on our taxes. (How it got mixed up with our financial papers, I'll never know.) She held the drawing up and asked if it was something I needed. I almost didn’t look at it, figuring she must be talking about a receipt of some kind, but I looked and there it was: The Sweet Spot.

Image.

The first aspect of my vision for the Sweet Spot was to see fiction as having four primary goals: 1) To entertain, 2) to provide an aesthetic experience, 3) to evoke an emotional response, and 4) to stimulate imagination. (None of these goals is more important than any other; they're all equal despite my numbering them here.) The Sweet Spot—the area where fiction is its strongest—is the point where all four goals coincide. Let's talk about each goal and why it's important, then we'll discuss why it's vital to tend to them all—to the Sweet Spot—if you want to produce the best fiction you're capable of. A disclaimer first: Yes, it's possible to write successful, publishable fiction focusing more on one goal than the others. Popular fiction tends to focus more on entertaining, and literary fiction tends to focus more on providing an aesthetic experience. But I believe that regardless of what your ultimate writing and publishing goals are, all types of fiction are most effective when writers focus on the Sweet Spot. To entertain: Effective fiction should capture readers‘ attention and hold it throughout a story. It should repay readers’ time and attention, should give them an experience they find fulfilling. When they finish a story, they should feel satisfied that their time was well spent. Why this goal is important: If readers aren't entertained, why should they bother reading fiction at all? Different readers may find different aspects of a story entertaining—some may enjoy action more, some detailed characterization, some evocative description—but people don't read by accident. They choose to read, and they want to feel like their choice was a worthwhile one. More, they want it to be enjoyable. To provide an aesthetic experience: Effective fiction should give readers an artistic experience through skilled use of language and imagery, innovative structure, and well-drawn characters. Originality should be strived for, and plots shouldn't be predictable. Why this goal is important: Fiction is art as much as craft, and even casual readers have a need for artistic appreciation. A well-turned phrase, a chilling description, a mind-blowing plot twist, a psychologically complex character, lively dialogue that you can practically hear . . . The artistic aspects of fiction make stories live and breathe, making them more than simple recitations of This Happened, Then That Happened. To evoke an emotional response: Each story should have an emotional core and explore the emotional life of the characters in addition to whatever else may be happening. The Wizard of 02 is just an adventure without the emotional core of Dorothy wanting to go home so badly. jaws is also just an adventure without the emotional core of Sheriff Brody feeling such a strong responsibility to protect his town from the killer shark. The outcome of a story should create an emotional catharsis for the reader. Why this goal is important: Anyone can communicate basic information with writing, but it's infinitely harder to use those abstract marks called letters to make readers care about imaginary people doing imaginary things (often in imaginary places and times). When art of any kind touches the human heart, when it moves us, it reconnects us with a huge aspect of what makes us human. It cuts through our emotional barriers and deepens our empathy. In short, it makes us better people, and what could be more important than that? To stimulate imagination: Interesting ideas, vivid description, and immersive point of view all help stimulate readers‘ imaginations. Banal, run-of-the-mill ideas and plain, overly simplistic writing that reads more like a summary than a story don't. Why this goal is important: For one thing, exercising our imaginations makes us smarter. Vivid fiction allows us to take the abstract and visualize the concrete, to see, hear, taste, touch, and smell that which is not real, to compare the choices characters make to those we might make—or not—in similar situations, and in speculative fiction (science fiction, fantasy, horror, and any combination thereof) we project ourselves into the world of tomorrow, worlds that never have been, and confront nightmares safely on the page.
The Sweet Spot: As I've already said, this is the intersection where the four goals meet. Stories that hit the Sweet Spot tend to these goals equally: they entertain, provide an aesthetic experience, evoke emotion, and stimulate imagination. Stories that do this operate strongly on all levels, not just one or two, and not only are they well-made stories, they fulfill multiple needs for readers. Stories that hit the Sweet Spot are, simply, the best stories of which we're capable of producing, and that's what we should strive for every time we write, isn't it? Short stories vs. novels: The Sweet Spot works for both short and long fiction, but in long fiction, you might think of each scene or chapter as having its own Sweet Spot. For example, Chapter Three of your novel might entertain because there's an action scene. It might provide an aesthetic experience because one of the characters is blind and you're going to write the action from his or her point of view. The character is fighting a once-beloved mentor, which will evoke emotion, and you'll use intercutting brief flashbacks of that character being trained as a child by the mentor during the present-time action to stimulate imagination (and since this is a structural choice, it doubles down on the aesthetic experience). In Chapter Four, you'll have a new set of goals, and so on. So when you write: At some point during your process—when you first generate ideas, while you draft, or when you review your first draft—ask yourself these questions:

1. 

What can I do to make this story as entertaining as possible?

2. 

What can I do to provide a greater aesthetic experience?

3. 

How can I more strongly evoke emotion?

4. 

How can I better stimulate readers‘ imaginations?

Do this, hit the Sweet Spot, and you'll take your fiction to a whole new level, gain more readers, and create fiction that readers not only enjoy, but that matters to them. What more could any of us possibly hope for? 

Managing story pace. 

You want your stories to read the way a symphony sounds, sometimes slow and evocative, other times fast and exhilarating. In short, you want your fiction to have effective pace. Pace equals movement, but whether a given chapter moves fast or slow will depend on what effect you want it to have on readers. The following techniques can help you manage the pace of your chapters—provided you choose them carefully, and always with your readers in mind.

Normal Pace. 

Use Normal Pace when the story is progressing but nothing "special" is happening. This technique is good for setting a scene or creating a transition between two more dramatic scenes. Normal Pace can also give readers a break from the action and allow you to tone down the pace of your story so you can begin to build it back up again. To create Normal Pace, use an even blend of description, dialogue, narration, and exposition. Since no one story element predominates, readers pay equal attention to them all, thus experiencing a smooth, steady flow of prose. Here's an example of Normal Pace (from my novel Like Death): Scott drove to the Ash Creek Community Recreation Center, pulled into the lot, and slowly drove around the small traffic circle where people could drop off‘ their children. It really wasn't much to look at from the outside: brown brick, narrow, rectangular windows, large glass doors like a department store. The lawn was neatly mowed and the hedges trimmed. Ash Creek wasn't exactly a ritzy community, but that didn’t stop folks from trying. He drove back into the lot, found a space that afforded a good view of the front of the rec center, and parked. He sat and watched people in sweats and shorts come and go—old, young, in singles and pairs. Some talking and laughing, others quiet and expressionless, as if they were husbanding their energy for the physical exertions to come. Busy for a Sunday afternoon, he thought. While nothing special is happening here, the scene isn’t static, either. We're introduced to the setting; we experience action as the character looks for a place to park and observes people going in and out of the rec center; and we get a blend of physical description and the character's impressions of the center, as well as a touch of exposition about the town itself. While the scene is obviously moving toward something more important, the point is that the scene is still moving—and that's the strength of Normal Pace.

Fast Pace. 

Use Fast Pace when the story needs to shift to a higher gear, such as during an action scene or when your characters are engaged in an emotional confrontation. Be careful, though: Fast Pace can only go on so long before readers begin to get exhausted or numb. Switch to a different pace after one scene or chapter, perhaps Normal or Atmospheric Pace. To create Fast Pace, focus on one fictional element to the near exclusion of all others—just dialogue, just narration of action, etc. Since readers have fewer elements to pay attention to, they can move more rapidly through your prose. Here's Fast Pace in action: Mongoose-quick, Ravena cross-drew two black metal shuriken from her leather wrist sheathes and hurled them at Omega. As soon as the throwing stars left her hands, she was up and running toward the terrorist. Two steps toward Omega. He moved to the left, and the first shuriken passed through empty air where his face had been only a split second before. Two more steps. Omega was in trouble now. From their last encounter three years ago, Ravena remembered that he had a tendency to duck left—precisely where she had thrown the second star. He didn’t have time to step in either direction. All he could do was fall backward and hope the second star missed him. In this example (which admittedly might be more suited to a comic book than prose fiction), the emphasis is entirely on action and fast-forward story movement. There's no description beyond physical action, and even that is kept to a minimum. The short sentences increase reading speed, serving as “action bits” for readers to gulp down. It's almost impossible not to read this at a gallop—and that's what Fast Pace is all about. 

Atmospheric Pace. 

Employ this technique to create a mood or a specific feeling in a chapter. Atmospheric Pace can set a scene, establish a tone, or foreshadow events to come—often all at the same time. To create Atmospheric Pace, focus on blending physical and psychological description to set the mood you want your readers to experience. For example: Benjamin Strathearn lay half in, half out of the creek. From the knees down, his legs were immersed in cool running water, but the sensation was overpowered by the pain in his right side. It felt as if he were on fire inside, as if instead of a musket ball, his flesh had been penetrated by a white-hot coal that grew hotter by the moment. Benjamin's cheek pressed against the creek bank, grass tickling his nose, the blades swaying in the breeze caused by his panting breath. It was early spring in South Carolina. Trees were beginning to bud into life, and birds sang out, calling to potential mates. Squirrels rustled through the underbrush, raccoons, deer, who knew what else. Wolves, maybe, drawn by the smell of blood. He wondered if they’d wait for him to die or if their hunger would goad them into attacking sooner. He wondered if he cared. This example, set during America's Revolutionary War, contrasts the peacefulness of the natural setting with the violent injuries the protagonist has suffered. The physical descriptions of both the setting and the character's wounds are matched by his mental and emotional impressions of them, creating an overall effect of suspended time, a moment when life and death are in precarious balance. As always, the story is still moving forward, but the blend of the physical and the psychological suffuses the scene with the desired atmosphere—and who isn't going to read on to see which way the scales finally tip? 

Suspenseful Pace. 

We'll talk about techniques for generating suspense in much more detail in the next chapter (and you’ll see the following example used in that chapter as well). For right now, let's discuss suspense only as it applies to pace. When you want to keep readers on the edge of their seats, use Suspenseful Pace. To create Suspenseful Pace, focus on step-by- step detail and action that work toward but delay the ultimate payoff. Don't confuse Suspense with Fast Pace, though. Suspense is slow, but it seems fast because readers speed up as they rush to see how events play out. Example: He's close. It wasn't so much a thought as it was an instinct, a prickle on the back of her neck, a tightening in her gut. Laura paused at a pawn broker's and pretended to look through the window at the items displayed: guitars, jewelry, video cameras . . . She was uncomfortably aware of what a good target she made—standing still, back of the head presented almost as if she had a bull's- eye tattooed there. She could almost imagine him sighting on her head, seeing it through cross-hairs, finger on the trigger, skin not sweaty, flesh cool as he calmly, professionally, began to squeeze . . . Stop it, she told herself. Neal would never risk acquiring her on a busy city street. There were too many witnesses; Neal preferred to work neat. Besides, it was too windy. As good a shot as he was, he might well miss. And Neal absolutely loathed taking a second shot. So much so that he never loaded a weapon with more than one round of ammunition. One of his more colorful personality quirks. Still, she was grateful for it now—it meant she was relatively safe. Emphasis on relatively. The accumulation of step-by-step detail as the character becomes aware she's being hunted—and struggles not to look like she’s aware—allows readers to experience the same anxiety as the character. Will Neal take a shot? How will Laura get away? Readers will increase their reading speed to find out the answers as quickly as they can. Plus, the indication that Laura knows Neal, as well as something of how assassins operate, will make readers curious about their relationship and even more eager for the eventual confrontation between the two characters. Different pacing techniques can be used to create individual scenes within a story or book chapter—one scene employing Atmospheric Pace, the next Suspenseful Pace, and the third Fast Pace. They can also form the basis for entire chapters. Use different pacing techniques whenever and however they best seem to serve the needs of your story. Keep in mind, though, that whatever else you do, you want to maintain an overall varied pace throughout a finished piece of fiction, so try to avoid having several scenes or chapters in a row that use the same technique. The power of you. "This is a hell of a story, but I'm not sure this is the way to tell it." A number of years ago, I submitted a story titled “Ghost in the Graveyard" to an anthology called Gothic Ghosts, edited by horror legend Charles L. Grant. I knew Charlie a little from the Genie boards (a forerunner of today's social media), but not so well that I felt comfortable writing him and asking him to clarify his comment. I didn't really need him to explain, though. I knew what he was reacting to: the story was written in second person. For some people, reading a story in second person is an acquired taste, while others would rather gargle with battery acid than subject themselves to second person. I can't remember if “Ghost in the Graveyard” was the first time I wrote in second person, but a quick glance at my bibliography shows that it was the first such story I had published. It appeared in All Hallows in June 2000. Since then I’ve written around twenty more second-person stories, which is about a seventh of all the short fiction I’ve had published. Not a huge proportion of my overall output, perhaps, but enough to form a collection of its own. As the years go by, I seem to be writing in second person more often, and one of my most recent second-person stories, “How to be a Horror Writer,” was nominated for a Shirley Jackson Award. If readers have been exposed to second-person fiction at all, it's most likely through Cho0se-Your-Own-Adventure books. But unless they read literary fiction or were an English major in college, they probably haven't encountered it anywhere else. Which is a shame, because second person can achieve effects that first and third person can't. Here are some things to consider when writing in second person.

- Use present tense with second person. Past tense—“You were eating an apple and you thought it was delicious"—doesn’t work well with second-person stories. Using you already keeps the reader at a distance from the story (which I’ll talk about later), so using past tense would push them away even farther. Present tense works better for second-person stories. Present tense is weird in fiction. You would think that present tense would indicate to readers that the events they're reading about are happening right now, this very instant, creating a sense of immediacy and urgency. But instead present-tense narratives come across as passive and lacking in energy. This is one of the reasons literary writers often favor present tense. They want to avoid any hint of melodrama in their work, want it to appeal to the intellect rather than emotions. The passive nature of present tense can intensify the distancing effect of passive voice.

- Second person creates cognitive dissonance in the reader. You’re constantly telling the reader that he or she is doing something when they damn well know they’re not. It's almost as if their subconscious is always reminding them that You are not this person and you are not doing this thing. This is one of the main reasons readers have trouble with present-tense stories, I think. But it’s also one of the great strengths of second person. Instead of inviting readers to relax and fall into the story, second person makes them wrestle with it mentally. Reading is always an interactive experience for readers, but second person creates a different sort of interaction. This effect works well for horror and weird fiction. Readers feel uncertain, unsure what to expect. They aren't safe. Safe fiction is comfort food for the mind, and there's nothing whatsoever wrong with that. But unsafe fiction can affect readers far more deeply and leave a lasting impression. Second person creates a distancing effect. It puts the reader in the position of being an observer rather than a participant in the story. It keeps them at arm's length, keeps them off balance. This isn't the normal way a story is told (as far as they’re concerned), so they aren't quite sure what's going to happen. They aren't sure of the “rules.” As I said earlier, they aren’t safe. And good horror fiction—any fiction that matters—should never be safe. Second person creates a numbing effect, and it has a flat, steady pace. If a character is experiencing something outside of what they believe to be the norm, something that is unreal or nightmarish, second person can create the same sort of detached numbness people experience when they're dreaming. Second person allows readers to experience the same dreamlike detachment that the viewpoint character in a story experiences. The flat pace works well to create a sense of creeping menace, of a slow, inexorable progression toward whatever awfulness awaits at the end. 

- Second person tends to work better at short lengths rather than long ones. Jay McKinney's famous second-person novel Bright Lights, Big City is a slim book, running under 50,000 words. I think the effects of second person—the distancing, the observer effect, the numbing, the flat, steady pace—can wear on most readers after a time. The effect can't be sustained past a certain point. Exactly where that point is depends on the individual reader, but in general, I'd say that second person works best at short story or novella length. Second person appeals more to readers of literary fiction than readers of commercial fiction. This is another reason narratives written in second-person are rare. Commercial fiction doesn't necessarily mean hackwork. I write a great deal of commercial fiction, usually for the media tie-in novels that l do, and I strive to make these novels just as good as anything else I write. But commercial fiction is intended to appeal to the widest audience possible. To do this, it needs to be relatable and readable. It needs to welcome readers to the story and its characters, not keep them outside the story, as second person does. Since Choose Your Own Adventure-type stories directly address the reader at each decision point—If you want to open the door, tum to page 37. If you want to leave the door closed, turn to page 113—second person works well. This is the only regular use of second person in commercial fiction that I'm aware of, though. Second person is more of a literary technique than an entertainment-focused technique. Second person can broaden a reader's perspective on what fiction is and what it can do. It's always good for readers to encounter narrative styles they may be unfamiliar with. The more varied reading experiences they have, the better readers they become overall. Stronger readers are more likely to expand their reading tastes and try new types of stories, which in turn makes them even better readers, further enriching their lives. Second person can be one more tool to help readers gain a deeper appreciation of literature, making writers better ambassadors for our art form. How do I decide when to use second person? When I want to create any of the previously mentioned effects. 

Instinct. 

Sometimes a story feels as if it should be written in second person. Why, I don't know. When I feel this, I don't question it. I just go with it. When I'm not sure how to find my way into a story, I play around with different techniques. My short stories tend to be less plotted out than my novels, and they often focus on very abstract or imagistic ideas. This means that I’m not always certain how and where to begin a story. I’ll draft different beginnings, using different techniques and voices, and whichever turns out to be the key to unlock the story for me, that's the one I use. Sometimes second person is that key. When what I'm writing is very personal. I mentioned Bright Lights, Big City earlier. McKinney's novel is based on his experiences as a young man living and working in New York City during the 1980's: lots of partying, lots of coke, lots of sex. He had trouble writing the book until he tried second person. I believe using second person created the distancing effect he needed in order to write about his experiences, even in a fictionalized form. It works the same for me. When I'm writing a story that's drawn very closely from my own experience, so much so that it could almost be a personal essay if I wrote it differently, second person gives me the distance I need in order to write about that experience. It helps me be a more detached observer of my own life, which allows me to work more effectively with my experiences as words and ideas on the page.

When I’m having trouble getting started on a story, I often go straight to second person without trying different techniques. Writing stories in second person is as natural to me as breathing. The words pour out of me like water when I use second person. I'm not sure why. Maybe there’s a part of me that's always a detached observer of my own life. (I wouldn't be surprised if most artists are like this.) Writing in second person allows me to tap into that observer part of me. I serve as a mentor for the Horror Writers Association, and a while back I was mentoring a gentleman who was an award-winning playwright and teacher of playwrighting. He wanted to learn to write fiction more effectively, but when I read his stories, I could see that he was writing them as if they were plays, just with more words-description, narration, etc.—surrounding the dialogue. I knew that he was writing stories from the same perspective as he was writing plays: from the perspective of someone sitting in the audience and watching. I wanted to show him that he needed to write with a close attachment to one character's viewpoint, as if he were one of the actors on stage experiencing the events of the play as they progressed. I wasn't sure how to explain this, so I sat down to write a story, paying attention to how I focused my awareness when I wrote, hoping that I'd come up with the right concepts and vocabulary to communicate to my mentee the difference between writing from an audience member's perspective and writing from an individual character's perspective. I wrote a second-person story, which already has a detached observer's point of view embedded in the technique. It worked. I was able to show my mentee the difference between the two ways of approaching writing. If you've never tried to write fiction in second person, read some examples then give it a shot. You might find it an interesting and rewarding challenge. You'll add another technique to your writer’s toolkit, and who knows? You might discover a new voice to speak with. Heightened awareness. Recently, I presented at a writers‘ workshop alongside a romance-author friend of mine. During her sessions, she discussed an element of romance fiction that one of her editors had dubbed “heightened awareness." This term describes the exaggerated sensory impressions that two would-be lovers experience in a romance story, sensory impressions that are so strong they create an increasingly irresistible attraction, an inevitable pull toward one another. As my friend talked about this concept, I realized that horror writers employ the same technique, but we do so by presenting characters’ sensory impressions that focus on their experience of fear. My friend said heightened awareness in romance isn't realistic. It's more of an idealized fantasy version of what humans experience. In other words, a romantic version, in all senses of the word. Horror writers, however, have reality on our side when it comes to presenting our characters’ heightened awareness. The fight or flight response—and the chemical reactions it causes—does heighten our awareness. We do perceive details during moments of fear that might otherwise escape our notice. I think this is a big reason why some horror fiction flounders and is ultimately ineffective. It doesn't realistically portray characters‘ fear even when they’re in unrealistic situations (or in situations that are outside of normal everyday human experience, such as being attacked by a serial killer). Using heightened awareness to convey characters’ terror is one of the most important techniques a horror writer can employ, maybe the most important. Strive for balance, though. Where some writers do too little to create an atmosphere of heightened awareness, some do too much. Don't exaggerate and overwrite to the point of accidental parody. For example: Jill felt an icy gust of air strike the back of her neck, as frigid, sharp, and painful as ten thousand spears made of pure Antarctic ice. The cold entered her body like a torrent of industrial coolant pumped into her by some gigantic hypodermic wielded by the hand of an enormous, monstrous being. Her internal temperature dropped rapidly and her body was wracked by uncontrollable seismic shudders, as if she were in the thrall of a grand mal seizure. Her extremities became numb, and an instant later they began to burn as if she'd plunged them into a vat of gasoline and then into a raging bonfire. The mistake in the above passage is going on and on about one sensory detail to the point of ridiculousness. Effective description is created from an accumulation of small details that build to an overall effect. Here's a better example: A cold breeze kissed the back of her neck, and she shivered. One detail, one description. The exaggeration, the heightened awareness? My use of the word kissed to describe the character's experience of the sensation, followed by the result: a shiver that is not only caused by the cold but by the sensual feel of a kiss on an especially sensitive—and exposed—part of the human body. A kiss that was an unexpected and invasive intimacy. A small attack. This one sentence—A cold breeze kissed the back of her neck, and she shivered—is far more effective and impactful than the previous word-vomit example, which creates a distance between the reader and the text, keeps the reader from imagining the feel of the breeze on the back of the character’s neck because the writer is too busy telling the reader what the character's reaction is.

EXERCISES

1.

Take a story or novel chapter you’ve already written. Go through it, looking for the different elements that create multilevel fiction. Highlight the elements in different colors. What does the pattern look like? Are you alternating between different types of information effectively? What could you do to improve the way you combine the different types? 

2.

Write a short scene in each of the four paces. Which seemed easier/more natural to write? Which was more difficult? 

3.

Pick a story by a horror writer whose work you really admire. Read the story (or a couple chapters if you chose a novel). When you're finished, write a short description of the writer's style. What did you like about the writer's style so much? What about this style makes the story successful horror in your view?

4.

Try to write a few paragraphs in the style of the writer you chose for exercise three. How did it turn out? Did you capture the writer’s style effectively?

5.

Write a few paragraphs in a style that you normally don't enjoy reading or even actively hate. Was it difficult to write? Why or why not? After doing this exercise, could you see yourself attempting to write an entire story in this style? Give it a try and see how successful this new style is for you. If it worked, why? If it was a failure, why?

VOICES FROM THE SHADOWS

1.

What makes good horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

2. 

What's the best advice you can give to a beginning writer of horror/dark fantasy/suspense?

Lee Murray, award-winning author of Into the Ashes

1. 

Good horror is heavy on the d's: death, darkness, and dread are the big ones. All good horror includes these in some form. After that, select from disfigurement, dismemberment, disgust, disaster, difference . . . Intensity is important, too. It's not just about being dark; the reader has to sense the horror in the darkness.

2. 

Think of it like a Mad Hatter’s tea party. No room at the literature table? Sit clown anyway. Take the rabbit hole to the underworld. Conjure shrink—grow monsters, evil queens, the perfidy of time, and lonely, spiraling madness. Choose chaos as a ruling principle. Ask the hard questions. Say what you mean. Talk when you want to. Debate the intricacies of language. Hide the bodies of your friends in teapots. Cut off their heads. Reference Poe. And drink more of the beverage of your choice.

Chuck Wendig, bestselling author of Wanderers

1. 

Horror as a genre is in so many strange places in terms of both the genre itself and what publishing expects of it, so I really don't know. I think it's just a good, scary story (emphasis on the “good story” part).

2. 

Don't worry about what scares people. Just worry about what scares YOU. 

John Claude Smith, author of The Wilderness Within

1.

Horror is meant to disturb readers, to touch readers, to shake up the norm and leave them wary of that which lurks in the shadows, or perhaps in their own unreliable thoughts. The subtleties of dread or the visceral, violent dismantling of the physical or psychological are key methods meant to touch readers deeply. One avenue of good horror I have found most ominous is the extermination of Hope. It is the moment when readers realize all traces of a happy ending have been annihilated. Where do we go from here? There is no sunlight in the answers, only perseverance, endurance. And more questions about the futility of it all, magnified by the horror of one’s continued existence. This is true horror.

2.

Embrace whatever raises your cackles and expound on them in a way that every reader can relate. Be it subtle or dripping with blood, the universal fears are always a good starting point upon which each writer builds his or her own body of work, weaving in the themes and obsessions that make them unique to said writer.

Patrick Lacey, author of Where the Stars Won't Shine

1.

I'm big on dread. If an author creates a consistent sense of dread throughout a novel or short story or what have you, count me in. Some writers are so great at this, it makes me hate them (in a good way) because it's so darn hard to pull off In horror, it shouldn't just be the monster/haunting/central conflict that’s making you squirm. It's everything else. It’s the character's reactions. Maybe they feel like they're being followed even when they aren't. Maybe everyday objects—cell phones, newspapers, televisions—take on a sinister quality. I think if you can pull that off, you've got the reader by throat. Or at least this one.

2.

Show-don't-tell is, I think, more important in horror than any other genre. Don't tell us your main character is scared. Show us her shaking hands. Show us the sweat on her forehead. Show us that voice in her head that’s screaming Get the hell out of here now because there's definitely something with too many eyes and too many teeth around that corner. The more time you spend on describing your character's fear without showing the effects of it, the more the tension will ramp down. Then that thing with the eyes and teeth is just another plot point.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

THE ART OF SUSPENSE

“The suspense is terrible. I hope it will last.” — Oscar Wilde
